APS100-2021F Final Test (POSTED TO COURSE WEBSITE) 

APS100 FINAL TEST - 2021F 

 This is a preview of the published version of the quiz 

Started: Nov 28 at 3:51p.m. 

Quiz Instructions 

There are three parts to the APS100 Final Test; multiple-choice, short-answer, and long-answer.  Please 
ensure that all three parts are completed and submitted by 11:59pm EDT on December 7th 2021.  
Students will have a maximum of 90 minutes to complete this test (between the hours of 6:00pm and 
11:59pm).  The test will end when the student presses send/submit/save, or when 90-minutes have 
elapsed, or at 11:59pm EDT, whichever occurs first.  

Students are NOT to use any unauthorized aids (including chat, discussion, etc), but can use all course 
materials (lecture and tutorial notes, etc).  This test is considered "open-book" without any student-to-
student or similar exchange of information. 

All students may receive unique questions and are therefore strongly advised NOT to share or compare 
answers with others (this would, of course, constitute an Academic Offense, at a minimum).  All student 
responses are processed for Academic Integrity thoroughly.  Any infractions will be addressed as per the 
rules and regulations of the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering, University of Toronto, and may 
include penalties including (but not limited to) permanent notation on official transcripts, failing the 
program, expulsion, etc. 

Please disable "ad-block" or any such extensions before writing this test.   

  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
APS100-2021F Final Test (POSTED TO COURSE WEBSITE) 

Important note for Part One: this is the multiple-choice part of the test.  Please review your question(s) 
carefully, and submit only (1) most-correct response.  Students are to use only 1 attempt to solve these 
questions and are reminded to save/submit their work prior to the deadline.  If you re-open any part of 
this test where you have already submitted a response, your original response will be over-written -- we 
will NOT be able to look at anything but your submission, so please use this system carefully.  Students 
must press the "submit/send/save" button, if available to submit their work.  Students are responsible 
for submitting their complete/correct submission by the deadline.  All students have one submission 
attempt.  Feel free to make reasonable assumptions, and answer the questions as best you can.  We will 
attempt to periodically monitor APS100 Piazza (but in "private" mode: all Q&A will be between 
instructor-and-student only).  Students may not provide a link (url) to an external source (such as an 
external Google Document or similar) in their response to questions.  Students are responsible for 
submitting their own, correct work by the deadline.   

Part 1 = 10 marks (1 mark per question, ten questions in total) 

Part 2 = 10 marks (5 marks per question, two questions in total) 

Part 3 = 10 marks (10 marks per question, one question in total)   

Students will have until 11:59pm EDT on December 7th 2021 to complete all three parts of this test.  
Students have 90 minutes to complete this test (from start to finish, or until 11:59pm).  Please use your 
time wisely and good luck to all. 

Note: this is a timed quiz. You may check the remaining time you have at any point while taking the quiz 
by pressing the keyboard combination SHIFT, ALT, and T... Again: SHIFT, ALT, and T... 

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
APS100-2021F Final Test (POSTED TO COURSE WEBSITE) 

Flag question: Question 1 

Question 1-0 pts 

"I confirm that my submission for the APS100-2021F Final Test ("this test") is an accurate and true 
representation of my own work, knowing that by signing this declaration untruthfully I will incur an even 
greater penalty if it is later discovered that I have cheated or otherwise behaved dishonestly on this 
assessment." 

Please type your full name and student number below to indicate your understanding and agreement to 
this statement.   

Flag question: Question 2 

Question 2-1 pts 

Which of the following statements is the most correct regarding academic integrity violations? 

Group of answer choices 

A.  Academic integrity violations are treated on a case by case basis. 

B.  Academic integrity violations always lead to failed courses. 

C.  Academic integrity violations are something you should be afraid of doing accidentally. 

D.  Academic integrity violations are treated the same for every student and every situation. 

Flag question: Question 3 

Question 3-1 pts 

 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
APS100-2021F Final Test (POSTED TO COURSE WEBSITE) 

Which of the following is NOT a good test and exam study tip? 

Group of answer choices 

A.  One long study session is more effective than multiple short sessions 

B.  For long-term retention, do your best to connect new knowledge to old understandings. 

C.  Re-reading texts is usually not enough: instead, be active in your learning. 

D.  Prioritize multiple exams not only by the day that they occur but by their difficulty. Make a study 

schedule that puts the most difficult aspects of each course as early as possible. 

Flag question: Question 4 

Question 4-1 pts 

Which of the following is NOT one of the four components of Polya's Problem Solving Principles? 

Group of answer choices 

A.  Understanding the Problem 

B.  Carrying out the Plan 

C.  Breaking down the Problem 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
APS100-2021F Final Test (POSTED TO COURSE WEBSITE) 

D.  Devising a Plan 

Flag question: Question 5 

Question 5-1 pts 

Which of the following is NOT a Code of Ethics that we follow/consider as UofT Engineering students: 

Group of answer choices 

A.  Waterloo Academic Code of Conduct 

B. 

Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Code of Ethics 

C.  UofT Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters 

D.  Professional Engineers Ontario Code of Ethics 

Flag question: Question 6 

Question 6-1 pts 

We discussed the SMART goal setting method in APS100. Which does not qualify as a SMART goal: 

Group of answer choices 

A.  All of the above are SMART goals 

B. 

I will meet with my study group to prepare for the CIV100 final tonight 

C. 

I will scan over my notes and then choose 2 chapters to work on. 

  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
APS100-2021F Final Test (POSTED TO COURSE WEBSITE) 

D.  I will spend 20 minutes studying chapter 4 practice problems 

Flag question: Question 7 

Question 7-1 pts 

Which one of these is NOT one of the five factors in the thriving framework? 

Group of answer choices 

A.  Diverse Citizenship 

B.  Negative Perspective 

C.  Academic Determination 

D.  Engaged Learning 

Flag question: Question 8 

Question 8-1 pts 

In tutorial, we discussed the 4-7-8 breathing technique. Which of the following is NOT critical when 
performing this exercise?  

Group of answer choices 

A.  Exhaling through the mouth instead of the nose 

B.  The exact duration of 4, 7, 8 seconds 

C.  Emptying the lungs of air before you begin 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
APS100-2021F Final Test (POSTED TO COURSE WEBSITE) 

D.  The ratio of 4:7:8 

Flag question: Question 9 

Question 9-1 pts 

If you do not do well on a test, it is important to remember: 

Group of answer choices 

A.  To review any feedback provided when it is marked 

B.  One test grade does not determine the success or failure and does not correctly reflect who you 

are as a person 

C.  There are resources to help you improve your test taking (Academic Success Centre, Learning 

Strategist) 

D.  All of these points are important to remember 

Flag question: Question 10 

Question 10-1 pts 

Equity, diversity, and inclusion were terms highlighted in APS100. Which of the following examples 
demonstrate inclusion best: 

Group of answer choices 

  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
APS100-2021F Final Test (POSTED TO COURSE WEBSITE) 

A.  A TA puts their students in randomized breakout rooms on BB Collaborate. They notice one 
room ends up having only 5 male students. The TA assigns Samantha to join that group. 

B.  Professor S is holding a 3 hour lecture, and notices that none of the students are speaking up 
when she asks her class questions. To increase engagement, she randomly calls upon Jerry to 
answer her question. 

C.  Michelle is placed in a group of 4, and two other students are already her friends. She spends 
the beginning of each group meeting catching up with her two friends and comparing their 
CIV100 lecture notes. 

D.  Alex was nominated as Team Lead in his extracurricular club. Twenty minutes into a Zoom 

meeting, Alex notices a new member, Joey, seems to stay muted the entire time and has not 
spoken up. Alex privately messages Joey if they would like to add in their thoughts to the 
meeting. 

Flag question: Question 11 

Question 11-1 pts 

After an unusually difficult midterm, you overhear some classmates discussing how they were able to 
divide the test questions among themselves and share solutions to solve ensuring they received a better 
grade. While it is clear a serious academic offence has been committed, consider our discussion in 
APS100 of the Professional Engineers Ontario (PEO) & Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
(IEEE) Codes of Ethics. Which of the following least applies to this situation regarding the appropriate 
action? 

Group of answer choices 

A.  To avoid real or perceived conflicts of interest whenever possible, and to disclose them to 

affected parties when they do exist. (IEEE 2) 

 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
APS100-2021F Final Test (POSTED TO COURSE WEBSITE) 

B.  A practitioner shall maintain the honour and integrity of the practitioner's profession and 

without fear or favour expose before the proper tribunals unprofessional, dishonest or unethical 
conduct by any other practitioner. R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 941, s. 77; O. Reg. 48/92, s. 1. (PEO 8) 

C.  A practitioner shall act towards other practitioners with courtesy and good faith. (PEO 2.i) 

D.  A practitioner must disclose immediately to the practitioner's client any interest, direct or 

indirect, that might be construed as prejudicial in any way to the professional judgment of the 
practitioner in rendering service to the client. (PEO 4) 

Flag question: Question 12 

Question 12-5 pts 

Describe why ethics are so important to the work of an engineer.  Use at least one practical engineering 
example to support your claim.  

(suggested 75 - 150 words; any citations, if used, do not count towards the word count) 

Flag question: Question 13 

Question 13-5 pts 

Briefly describe what the U of T Student Code of Conduct is, and why it is important that the University 
have a such a code.  Identify two possible offences that might be considered violations of this code of 
conduct. Write your answer in the text box.  

(suggested 75 - 150 words; any citations, if used, do not count towards the word count) 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
APS100-2021F Final Test (POSTED TO COURSE WEBSITE) 

Flag question: Question 14 

Question 14-10 pts 

Based on your mastery of the APS100 course content, you are now hired as an APS100 Teaching 
Assistant (“TA”), and are responsible for writing a professional email to one of the three students in the 
case study attached below, helping that student transition into their first-year in engineering.  

Using the course learning outcomes, syllabus, course calendar, lecture/tutorial content and/or any other 
relevant aid, please write a ~1 page (275 words max; citations don't count) email to ONE of the three 
students mentioned in the case study attached, in the box below.  As a representative of the course, 
first select the student you are responding to, then introduce yourself with the purpose of creating a 
personal connection with the student.   In your email, you must carefully identify at least one positive 
learning opportunity that you think the student will identify with and explain why.  Finally, identify a 
challenge that you think they may face in their first-year and mention two different ways to 
resolve/address that challenge.  Conclude the email in a supportive manner.  You may make 
reasonable/logical assumptions as needed.   

(Backup Text of Case Study)  

It is August 30th, 2022, and incoming students are looking forward to starting their first-ever term at the 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering, University of Toronto.  Samuel, Rohan, and Lily are part of 
the incoming cohort of students.  They have had a mix of in-person and online experiences at the high-
school level and have a wealth of learning experiences (academic and non-academic) as well.  Samuel is 
coming from a local Toronto high school, has participated on the school basketball team, and enjoys 
team-based activities.  Rohan is an international student, lives in-residence, is an avid chess player, and 
enjoys reading science-fiction books in his spare time.  Lily has traveled a lot, enjoys trying new things, is 
originally from Vancouver B.C., and is presently living with her uncle and aunt in downtown Toronto.  
Each of these students is trying to prepare themselves for the fall semester, and have done quite well in 
high school). 

  
 
  
 
 
  
 
