University of Toronto 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
APS112 and APS113 Engineering Strategies and Practice 

Quiz #2 April 07, 2016 

This is a 50-minute quiz. The quiz is closed book and closed notes. The quiz has a total of 18 
questions, worth a total of 30 marks. The questions are divided between two booklets.  

Question Booklet #2 – Short-Answer Question Booklet 

First Name: 

Last Name: 

UTOR Email: 

There are 3 short-answer questions, worth a total of 15 marks. These must be answered in the 
spaces provided in this Short-Answer Question Booklet. This question booklet, with your name 
and UTOR Email filled in, must be returned with the multiple-choice answer sheet slipped 
inside. Do not separate any pages. Do not write on the QR code at the top of the pages. 

@mail.utoronto.ca

Page 1 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS – ANSWER IN THE SPACE PROVIDED ON THE QUESTION PAPER. 

16) (3 marks) Sketch a realistic two‐point perspective drawing of a child’s toy, which is a simple 
wooden block with geometric shapes painted on the sides. In your drawing, three sides 
must be visible. On the top side is a square. On one side is a circle, and on the other is an 
equilateral triangle (see Figure 1).  

Figure 1: Shapes to be included

17) (2 marks) A plastics electronics housing (see Figure 
2) consists of frame and two caps that are put 
together with 4 nuts and bolts as depicted in the 
drawing below. List two methods you could use to 
improve design for manufacturing and assembly.  

Figure 2: Plastic electronics housing 

Page 2 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18) In a 100‐year‐old company, one of the original presses (see Figure 

3) is still being used to punch leather patterns for the 
manufacture of handbags. The operator is sitting down and places 
large leather pieces in the press by hand, and then actuates the 
press with a foot switch, which punches out the pattern. The 
press closes with enough force to crush the operator’s fingers or 
hands.  

a)  (2 marks) What two factors combine to make this a high‐risk 

operation? 

Figure 3: Press configuration

b)  (2 marks) List two responsibilities of the operator under the Occupational Health and 

Safety Act. 

c)  (1 mark) List one responsibility of the operator’s supervisor under the Occupational 

Health and Safety Act. 

<<Question 18d is on the next page>> 

Page 3 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d)  (5 marks) The new owner of the company has determined that the risk is so high that 
two separate safety systems are required, so that even if one fails, the second will 
prevent injury.  Providing some evidence of structured creative thinking, design at least 
three different safety systems that could work together, and choose the best two to 
install on the existing press. 

Page 4 of 4 

 
 
 
