University of Toronto 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
APS112 and APS113 Engineering Strategies and Practice 

Quiz #1 February 12, 2016 

This is a 50-minute quiz. The quiz is closed book and closed notes. The quiz has a total of 19 
questions, worth 30 marks. The questions are divided between two booklets.  

Question Booklet #2 – Short-Answer Question Booklet 

First Name: 

Last Name: 

UTOR Email: 

There are 4 short-answer questions, worth 15 marks in total. These must be answered in the 
spaces provided in this Short-Answer Question Booklet. This question booklet, with your name 
and UTOR Email filled in, must be returned along with the multiple-choice answer sheet. Do not 
separate any pages. Do not write on the QR code at the top of the pages. 

@mail.utoronto.ca 

Page 1 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We are not looking for long paragraph answers. Use the spaces provided on the question paper 
to write your answers in short sentences or bullet points for Questions 16-19. (Questions 1 to 15 
are found in the multiple-choice question booklet.) 

All short-answer questions refer to the following problem statement and figure: 

Figure 1: This is a solar panel on a vertical post. It can rotate around a vertical axis at the base of the post. 
There is very little friction, so it would be easy for a person to rotate the panel by hand.  
(Figure based on a Sketchup model Solar Tree 1.0 uploaded by Simon V. on 12/13/13 to the 3d warehouse at 3dwarehouse.sketchup.com) 

You are designing an ultra-low-cost tracking system to rotate a solar panel to follow the sun 
from morning to night. (You are not designing the panel or post. The solar panel already exists 
and is mounted on a post with a freely rotating base.)  

A typical commercial tracking system has sensors and motors and is computer controlled. You 
need to design a mechanical system that can be set in motion by a human each morning, and 
will approximately follow the sun during the day with no further human assistance. The target 
market is remote and isolated communities in northern Bangladesh that have no access to 
power, and have a low level of technological development. 

16.  (4 MARKS) List ONE Function, TWO important objectives and ONE important constraint for 

the design.  

FUNCTION: 

1)   Track the sun – sense position of the sun – actuate to move the panel  

OBJECTIVES:  

1)   As X as possible    X = inexpensive, durable, intuitive (easy to operate), reliable, easy to 

maintain,  etc.  
Suitable metrics and goals could be added to each of these but are not required here.  

CONSTRAINT:  
Design must be X :  Any concrete  X will do the job.  Safe, Less than $2, Maintainable with local 
materials, etc.  

Page 2 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. (2 MARKS) When designing the tracking device, you are asked to draw on analogies to 

provide ideas. Provide a useful analogy, and explain what type of analogy it is and how it is 
relevant to the current problem.  

The design will have to include several subfunctions, and we could find suitable analogies for 
each.  Subfunctinos include storing energy, a slow timing mechanism to calibrate release of 
energy, or a sunshine tracking device, an actuation device. 

Sunshine tracker 

Biological analogy:   

•  Sunflower or other plant that follows the sun? 

Personal analogy:   

•  How does a person do it – sensing the position of the sun for sunbathing (with eyes 

closed perhaps)? 

Technical analogy:   

•  How would we sense a light for a motion detector or some other camera? 
•  How does a sundial work? 

Clock Mechanism 

Technical analogy:  

•  How does a clock mechanism work? 
•  How does an hour glass work? 

Energy Storage for gradual release 

Technical Analogy 

•  How is energy stored in a grandfather clock?  In a wind up watch? 

Biological Analogy 

•  Energy lost from a melting icicle (storage and clock?)  

1 mark for identifying a USEFUL i.e. relevant analogy and 1 mark for naming it.  

Page 3 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18. (4 MARKS)  One solar panel generates 100 W (1 Watt = 1 J/s) at noon during full sunshine. 
In the village, solar energy is stored in batteries and used after dark only to provide light for 
reading and other nighttime activities.  

In the space below, estimate how many solar panels are needed for a village of 1000 people 
in a remote and underdeveloped part of northern Bangladesh. You must compute an actual 
number, and show the steps used in making your estimate. Most of the marks will be 
assigned for showing that you know how to do such a calculation.  
Do all calculations using Watt-hours (Wh) as your unit of energy.  

Useful Information: A bright LED flashlight needs 4W of power.  

BASIS is 1 day: 

Energy consumed 

1000 people x 1 household/5 people =  200 households 

200 households x 2 lights per household x 3 hours per day x 4 W/light ~  5000 W hrs 

Energy generated  

100W/panel x 12 hours of daylight x .7 average of noon power output during the day (assuming 

tracking) x .7 loss of efficiency going to the battery and back  

= 600 W hrs/day per panel 

5000W hrs / 600 W hrs/panel = 8 panels   

It is not necessary to have every factor. It is not necessary to use the same numbers.    
Reasonable estimates could result in  

2000 W hrs <energy consumed < 20000 W hrs 

The output of the panel should be estimated much tighter:  

300 W hrs < energy generated < 1200 W hrs (hard maximum) 

So the answer could vary quite widely as follows  

(20,000 W hrs/300 W hrs  per panel) 60 panels > answer > 2 panels (2000 W hrs/1200 W hrs)  

1 mark for having the general method correct including not using too many significant figures in 
the calculations 
1 mark for identifying the need to estimate consumption and generation 
1 mark for capturing most of the basic assumptions 
1 mark for an answer in range, assuming that the method has been followed.  
0 marks for a guess

Page 4 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5 MARKS) IN THE SPACE BELOW, provide a Functional Decomposition of the required 
tracking device, propose some viable solutions for the main subfunctions, and propose an 
overall solution.  

Some hints are in the previous question:  The main function is to rotate the panel in to keep 
it as perpendicular as possible to the sun.  A human will “set” it in the morning, and then go 
off to work.  By using such a device, an extra 30% efficiency can be gained over a stationary 
panel.  

Subfunctions:  
•  Store energy  
•  Convert energy to movement of the panel.  
•  Timing mechanism   OR   Solar tracking mechanism 

You can simply brainstorm solutions for the subfunctions, or you can use SCAMPER, Triz, 
Analogy or some other technique to help you generate more possible solutions.  

Simple solutions for storing energy:  Lift a weight.  Start with a fresh candle or piece of wood 
(which has chemical energy)  Compress air in a 2L pop bottle, wind up a spring, etc.  

Simple solutions for converting energy to movement.  Weight drops slowly and moves a rope 
attached to one side of the panel.  Air expands and pushes a plunger.  Spring (bungee cord) 
retracts and pulls on the panel. Heat from candle expands air in piston attached to the panel. 

Simple timing mechanisms:  water dripping from a tiny hole in a bottle.  Sand pouring out of a 
hole in a bucket.  Slow burn of candle.  Pendulum and gear mechanism like a grand father 
clock.  Movement through a very viscous medium. 

Simple tracking mechanism:  Wax that melts when shadow moves and exposes it to sunlight.  
Long tube or slot with solar cell in the end – generates power only when lined up with the sun.  
Anything that is painted black and heats in the sunshine so that it moves to put itself back in the 
shade – bimetal strip.  Gas in a pipe. Etc.  

Any combination would be ok.   

1)  Human pumps up an old car innertube that slowly leaks into a bicycle pump pushing it 

out over the day rotating the panel.  

2)  Human winds up a spring and puts in a square of black wax to hold it in place.  When 
the sun moves and hits the wax it starts to melt and the panel rotates it so it is back in 
the shade.   

1 mark for knowing what a functional decomposition is and making an effort.  
1 mark for getting the key subfunctions 
1 mark for generating at least two solutions for storing energy 
1 mark for generating at least two solutions for timing  AND/OR tracking 
1 mark for putting it together in a final answer 

Page 5 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Do NOT write on this page 

Page 6 of 6 

 
 
