University of Toronto 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
APS112 and APS113 Engineering Strategies and Practice 
Quiz #2 April 11, 2017 

This is a 50-minute quiz. The quiz is closed book and closed notes. The quiz has a total 
of 32 questions, worth 47 marks. The questions are divided between two booklets.  

Question Booklet #2 – Short-Answer Question Booklet 

First Name: 
Last Name: 
UTOR Email: 

  @mail.utoronto.ca 

There are 3 short-answer questions, worth 18 marks in total. These must be answered 
in the spaces provided in this Short-Answer Question Booklet. This question booklet, 
with your name and UTOR Email filled in, must be returned with the multiple-choice 
answer sheet slipped inside. Do not separate any pages. Do not write on the QR code 
at the top of the pages. We are not looking for long paragraph answers. Use short 
sentences or bullet points. 

Page 1 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30. (6 MARKS) Using appropriate line types, draw a multiview representation of the 

widget in Figure 1. Include dimensioning lines. Instead of actual dimensions, which 
you don’t have, use variables (EG. X cm) 

•  1 mark: top view correct 

o  0.5 missed line or other minor error 

•  1 mark: front view correct 

o  0.5 missed line or other minor error 

•  1 mark: side view correct 

o  0.5 missed line or other minor error 

•  1 mark: All 4 hidden lines correct 

o  0.5 At least one hidden line correct 

•  Dimensions 

o  0 Marks: none or drastically incorrect 
o  1 mark: some dimensions missing 
o  1.5 marks: all dimension lines correct, but there more than needed 
o  2 marks: all dimensions correct (and no extras) 

Page 2 of 4 

 
 
 
31.  a. (4 MARKS) List and explain four criteria for a design to be eligible for a utility 

patent.  

0.5 Marks: for each bolded word (or similar) 

0.5 marks: for each reasonable explanation 

Max of 4. If they give five then ignore the last bullet point.  

•  Novelty: The idea cannot have been in the public domain previously 

•  Non-Obvious: to a person of ordinary skill in the related art 

•  Useful: The idea must have some purpose. 

•  Full disclosure: required so that someone skilled could reduce the 

description to practice.  

•  Laws of nature, physical phenomena, and abstract ideas are Not Patentable.  

b. (1 MARK) In one sentence explain how the patent system promotes innovation.  

During the exclusivity period (20 years) the patent holder has an opportunity to 
recoup any research and development costs thereby encouraging companies to 
invest in research and development departments.  

• 

If more than one sentence, ignore 2nd sentence onward.  

c. (1 MARK) In one sentence explain how the patent system hinders innovation.  

When a patent holder values their patent more than the individual wanting to use the 
patent is willing to pay, this can lead to an impasse and slows consultation.  

• 

If more than one sentence, ignore 2nd sentence onward.  

Page 3 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
32. a. (1 MARK) What is the relationship between Consequence – Severity – Hazard – 

Risk? 

Risk = (Severity of the Consequence) * (Probability of the Hazard) 

(or they could say this in prose as well) 

b. (1 MARK) What is the relationship between Risk – Safety? 

Safety is the attempt to minimize risk. 

Safety is the attempt to reduce risk to an acceptable level. 

c. (1 MARK) In engineering terms, what is an Accident? 

Unintended exposure to a hazard. 

d. (3 MARKS) In three or fewer sentences concisely describe a real world situation, then 

identify the Hazard and Consequence for this specific situation.   

The example from Lecture (which we will allow): 

1 Mark: The stage in Convocation Hall is elevated. There is a series of stairs leading 

from the main floor to the top of the stage. There are no rails or guarding.  

Hazard 

1 mark: correct example of situation where there is a possibility of 
damage to health, property or the environment 

•  Falling down the stairs 

Consequence 

1 mark: correct example of the result of exposure to a hazard: 

•  Personal injury to the user of the stage, potentially even 

death. 

Page 4 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
