University of Toronto 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
APS112 and APS113 Engineering Strategies and Practice 
Quiz #2 April 11, 2017 

This is a 50-minute quiz. The quiz is closed book and closed notes. The quiz has a total 
of 32 questions, worth 47 marks. The questions are divided between two booklets.  

Question Booklet #2 – Short-Answer Question Booklet 

First Name: 
Last Name: 
UTOR Email: 

  @mail.utoronto.ca 

There are 3 short-answer questions, worth 18 marks in total. These must be answered 
in the spaces provided in this Short-Answer Question Booklet. This question booklet, 
with your name and UTOR Email filled in, must be returned with the multiple-choice 
answer sheet slipped inside. Do not separate any pages. Do not write on the QR code 
at the top of the pages. We are not looking for long paragraph answers. Use short 
sentences or bullet points. 

Page 1 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30. (6 MARKS) Using appropriate line types, draw a 

multiview representation of the widget in Figure 1. 
Include dimensioning lines. Instead of actual 
dimensions, which you don’t have, use variables (EG. 
X cm) 

Figure 1: 3D widget 

Page 2 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
31.  a. (4 MARKS) List and explain four criteria for a design to be eligible for a utility 

patent.  

b. (1 MARK) In one sentence explain how the patent system promotes innovation.  

c. (1 MARK) In one sentence explain how the patent system hinders innovation.  

Page 3 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32. a. (1 MARK) What is the relationship between Consequence – Severity – Hazard – 

Risk? 

b. (1 MARK) What is the relationship between Risk – Safety? 

c. (1 MARK) In engineering terms, what is an Accident? 

d. (3 MARKS) In three or fewer sentences concisely describe a real world situation, then 

identify the Hazard and Consequence for this specific situation.   

Hazard 

Consequence 

Page 4 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
