University of Toronto 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
APS112 and APS113 Engineering Strategies and Practice 

Quiz #1 February 12, 2016 

This is a 50-minute quiz. The quiz is closed book and closed notes. The quiz has a total of 19 
questions, worth 30 marks. The questions are divided between two booklets.  

Question Booklet #2 – Short-Answer Question Booklet 

First Name: 

Last Name: 

UTOR Email: 

There are 4 short-answer questions, worth 15 marks in total. These must be answered in the 
spaces provided in this Short-Answer Question Booklet. This question booklet, with your name 
and UTOR Email filled in, must be returned along with the multiple-choice answer sheet. Do not 
separate any pages. Do not write on the QR code at the top of the pages. 

@mail.utoronto.ca 

Page 1 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We are not looking for long paragraph answers. Use the spaces provided on the question paper 
to write your answers in short sentences or bullet points for Questions 16-19. (Questions 1 to 15 
are found in the multiple-choice question booklet.) 

All short-answer questions refer to the following problem statement and figure: 

Figure 1: This is a solar panel on a vertical post. It can rotate around a vertical axis at the base of the post. 
There is very little friction, so it would be easy for a person to rotate the panel by hand.  
(Figure based on a Sketchup model Solar Tree 1.0 uploaded by Simon V. on 12/13/13 to the 3d warehouse at 3dwarehouse.sketchup.com) 

You are designing an ultra-low-cost tracking system to rotate a solar panel to follow the sun 
from morning to night. (You are not designing the panel or post. The solar panel already exists 
and is mounted on a post with a freely rotating base.)  

A typical commercial tracking system has sensors and motors and is computer controlled. You 
need to design a mechanical system that can be set in motion by a human each morning, and 
will approximately follow the sun during the day with no further human assistance. The target 
market is remote and isolated communities in northern Bangladesh that have no access to 
power, and have a low level of technological development. 

16.  (4 MARKS) List ONE Function, TWO important objectives and ONE important constraint for 

the design.  

FUNCTION: 
1)   

OBJECTIVES:  

1)    

2)   

CONSTRAINT:  

1)   

Page 2 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. (2 MARKS) When designing the tracking device, you are asked to draw on analogies to 

provide ideas. Provide a useful analogy, and explain what type of analogy it is and how it is 
relevant to the current problem.  

Page 3 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18. (4 MARKS)  One solar panel generates 100 W (1 Watt = 1 J/s) at noon during full sunshine. 
In the village, solar energy is stored in batteries and used after dark only to provide light for 
reading and other nighttime activities.  

In the space below, estimate how many solar panels are needed for a village of 1000 people 
in a remote and underdeveloped part of northern Bangladesh. You must compute an actual 
number, and show the steps used in making your estimate. Most of the marks will be 
assigned for showing that you know how to do such a calculation.  
Do all calculations using Watt-hours (Wh) as your unit of energy.  

Useful Information: A bright LED flashlight needs 4W of power.  

Page 4 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19. (5 MARKS) IN THE SPACE BELOW, provide a Functional Decomposition of the required 
tracking device, propose some viable solutions for the main subfunctions, and propose an 
overall solution.  

Page 5 of 6 

 
 
Do NOT write on this page 

Page 6 of 6 

 
 
