University of Toronto, Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
APS112 & APS113 Engineering Strategies and Practice 
Course Coordinator: Jason Bazylak  
Communication Coordinator: Ted Nolan 
Team Coordinator: Patricia Sheridan 
Instructors: Ted Nolan, Tome Kosteski, and Patricia Sheridan 
Midterm Examination 
 Start: February 02, 2021, 6am EST (Toronto Time) 
Finish: February 02, 2021, 6pm EST (Toronto Time) 

Declaration 
In submitting this assessment, I confirm that my conduct during this exam adheres to the Code of 
Behaviour on Academic Matters. I confirm that I did NOT act in such a way that would constitute 
cheating, misrepresentation, or unfairness, including but not limited to, using unauthorized aids and 
assistance, impersonating another person, and committing plagiarism. I pledge upon my honour that 
I have not violated the Faculty of Applied Science & Engineering’s Honour Code during this 
assessment. 

[No signature is required; agreement is indicated by submission of the exam] 

Turnitin 
When you submit your exam answers and you select, “I agree to the tool’s End-User Licence 
Agreement. This assignment submission is my own, original work.” Your midterm answers will then 
be submitted to Turnitin.com, a software package licensed by the University of Toronto. This 
software will search for textual similarities between all midterm answers in the course for the 
purposes of detecting plagiarism. 

Midterm Instructions  

  We estimate this midterm will take 60-minute to complete the five questions.  
  Type X: An “open book” examination. The candidate may bring to the examination and use, 

any books, notes or other printed or written material, without restriction. 

While you are free to access any of these resources, the midterm is still intended as an 
individual evaluation. As such you are not to communicate with anyone outside of the 
teaching team regarding the exam until after the close of the exam.  

  Type your responses directly into this exam booklet. Answer each question only on the page 

on which the question is written. The markers will only mark one page per question.  
  The word count indicates our expectations for each question, but it is not an enforced word 
limit. We want you to get to the point and not ramble, but also do not spend excessive time 
editing for concision.  

  The marks listed on each question indicate our expectations. 
  You can submit your completed exam booklet as a .docx or PDF into Quercus as per the 

instructions below.  

  Remember to save your work frequently! Good luck!  

Part 1: Writing the Exam 

1.  Download the exam booklet (.docx) to your computer. There is also a .PDF version of this 

exam supplied only to have a fixed reference for the formatting. Do not write your answers 
into that file.  

2.  Rename the exam answer booklet to the following where you insert your name and student 

number for the placeholders. 

 
APS112_Midterm_First name_Last name_Student number 

APS113 students should use “APS113” in place of “APS112” in the naming convention. 

3.  Answer all questions by typing directly into this exam booklet. Be sure to save the document 

frequently as you work.  

Note: Completing the exam answer booklet does not in itself constitute submission of the exam. You 
must submit in Part 2: Submitting the Exam.  

Part 2: Submitting the Exam 
Once you have completed the exam answer booklet in Part 1: Writing the Exam, you must submit it. 
You must do this through Quercus. DO NOT email the files to us. The process of submitting your 
exam through Quercus is detailed below.  

The exam submission deadline is 6 pm EST (Toronto time). DO NOT wait until the last minute to 
start submitting your exam. Submit is as early as possible to allow you to seek technical assistance if 
you have any technical difficulties.  

To submit your exam booklet (.docx or PDF) into Quercus. 

1.  Click on Submit Assignment. 
2.  Click on Choose File and then select your completed exam booklet file (.docx or PDF) 

(APS112_Midterm_First name_Last name_Student number). 

3.  Check off the box “I agree to the tool’s End-User Licence Agreement. This assignment 

submission is my own, original work.”  

4.  Click on Submit Assignment. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Midterm Questions  

Q1: Project Management 

A project with eight tasks has a Gantt Chart as shown on the next page in Figure 1. The Gantt Chart 
has the task identification number (ID #), the start date for each task, end date of each task, duration 
for each task. Tasks dependencies are also illustrated in the Gantt Chart. The task descriptions are 
removed so that their description does not influence your decision process. Note that any person in 
the team can complete any task in the chart. Task ID#8 requires two people while all other tasks 
require only one person. Please answer the questions that appear on the pages following the Gantt 
Chart. 

***DO NOT ANSWER ON THIS PAGE. ANSWER ON THE PAGES FOLLOWING THE GANTT CHART 
UNDER THE QUESTIONS. WORK ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE MARKED.*** 

 
 
Figure 1 Gantt Chart for Question 1. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Blank page on update version of midterm 

 
a.  [3 marks] In the ESP Status Report (see Table 1) fill in the task number and due date for 

each task shown on the Gantt chart in Figure 1. You do not have to fill in task name, person 
assigned, outcome, or date completed. 

2 marks for #s, 1 mark for dates due 

Table 1: ESP Status Report 

#  Task Name 

Person Assigned 

Date Due 

Date Completed 

13/06/2021 

16/06/2021 

20/06/2021 

21(22)/06/2021 

22(23)/06/2021 

24(25)/06/2021 

28(29)/06/2021 

22/06/2021 

1 

Outcome:  

2 

Outcome:  

3 

Outcome:  

4 

Outcome: 

5 

Outcome: 

6 

Outcome:  

7 

Outcome:  

8 

Outcome:  

Outcome:  

Outcome:  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b.  [5 marks] What is the minimum number of workers required to finish this project and 

justify your result? (demonstrate your structured thinking and justify your answer with a 
word count of 100 words) 

After looking over the Gantt Chart we see that there are overlapping tasks, the worst case is 

Task 3 -> 4,5,8:  Task 8 requires 2 persons and Task 5 overlaps Task 8 so we have 3 persons 

Now looking backward in time from task 4  

Task 1 -> Task 2 -> Task 3 are independent, and follow a predecessor—successor relationship 
so no new persons are need as one of the 3 or each of the 3 can do the tasks 

Looking forward in time from Task 5 

No overlap, existing team members can carry out the tasks 

Team size is 3 

OR 

Shift Task 7 left and then shift Task 8 to the right  Team size is 2 AND milestone is improved. 

2 marks for recognizing task relationships. 

2 marks for recognizing work distribution. 

1 mark for any Team size. 

c. 

[5 marks] You are asked to speed up the delivery time. The Vice President gives you an 
additional team member so that your new team size is your result from Part (b) plus one. 
You cannot change any task durations nor any dependencies. Provide a written explanation 
as to whether you can speed up the delivery time (and by how much time) with the new 
team member or you cannot speed up the delivery time with the new team member. 
(demonstrate your structured thinking and justify your answer with a word count of 180 
words). 

First we look at “finding time” 
Task 7 is the final task in the plan.  It can be moved up by two days because it has a time gap with its 
predecessor.  Looking at the Gantt Chart, Tasks 1, 2 and 3 are pinned due to their dependencies and 
there is no time gap in their start dates.  As such, there is no room for improvement in time and 
adding personal also does not speed things up. Tasks 4, 5, 6 also have no time gap before their start 
date and the end date of their predecessor. 
Second we look at personnel needs 
If we shift Task 7, we have a new overlap with Task 6.  Since each task requires one person 
(therefore two in total).  If Task 8 is shifted right, there is no task overlap, only 2 team members are 
needed. 
Conclusion: Extra member not needed.   

2 marks analysis of time analysis 
2 marks team size analysis 
1 mark that additional team member has no impact  OR save time and lose one team member 

 
 
 
 
 
 
d.  [8 marks] Draw a new Gantt Chart (you can cut and paste from software or provide a clear and legible hand drawn sketch) if each person on your 
team (from part a) can only work during their normal working hours (i.e. 9 am to 5 pm), no work during the weekend (assume that the Gantt Chart 
in Figure 1 did permit weekend work), assume that there are no statutory holidays. Your team members work in the following times zones. The first 
member is in Toronto, if you need more team members they are as follows; the second member is 14 hours ahead, the third member is 3 hours 
behind, all remaining persons are 6 hours ahead. Your Gantt Chart must use Toronto time and day. Note that there may be a new deadline. 

1 mark: Gantt chart with eight bar graphs 

1 mark:  Task dependencies are the same as in Figure 1 

1 mark: There are task numbers 

1 mark: There are dates 

1 mark: Bar graphs resemble Figure 1.  Note that some students may shift Task 7 and Task 8 for optimization and that is fine. 

1 mark: Milestone is shown on the Gantt Chart 

2 marks: Notes/arguments showing who/how each person is assigned to each task (is the student using random procedures or are they 
thinking about using the best allocation of people to achieve the best milestone) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q2: Cost Estimation  

You are working for a consulting company and you are asked to prepare an estimate for a 
construction proposal. The project is in the pre-planning phase and you are required to submit the 
estimate in just 15 minutes. The information you are given is that land will have to be purchased, the 
building is an office building, the building will be 12 stories high, there will be underground parking, 
each floor of the building will have a footprint of 20,000 ft2, and the construction project will be in 
the GTA (Greater Toronto Area). To help you, the company provides you information on building 
projects in Canada (See Appendix A and Appendix B at the end of this examination paper).  

a.  [2 marks] What method of estimation is best suited for this request (demonstrate your 

structured thinking and justify your answer with a word count of 25 words)? 
Analogous.  Very little time available and Appendix A is best suited for analogous 
estimates. 

1 mark analogous (or any similar word) 
1 mark for reasoning 

b.  [4 marks] What is your estimate for the cost of land? (demonstrate your structured thinking 

and justify your answer with a word count of 100 words) 

From Appendix A, we only have land price.  
Price for land in GTA ranges from $50/ft2 to $200/ft2.  Since we don’t have a location we can 
choose a mid price of $125/ft2 (at this stage even using the price at the extremes will work since 
they are of the same order as $125/ft2). 

Cost = $125/ft2 * 20,000ft2 = $2,500,000 

1 mark using Appendix A 
1 mark recognizing cost range 
1 mark justification for choosing a cost value  
1 mark doing a proper calculation 
              reasonable value is $ millions 

c. 

[4 marks] What is your estimate for the cost of the building? For simplicity in reading the 
chart in the appendix, use a class A building and do not use any interior fitout. (demonstrate 
your structured thinking and justify your answer with a word count of 55 words) 

Using Appendix B, we have a range from $200/ft2 to $315/ft2 for each story using a rate for a 
class A building between 5 to 30 stories.  For our order of magnitude use mid price of $263/ft2. 

Building cost = $263/ft2 * 12 * 20,000 ft2 = $63,120,000 

Note:  Students must use and recognize that 12 stories must be included. 
1 mark using Appendix B 
1 mark recognizing cost range 
1 mark justification for choosing a cost value  
1 mark doing a proper calculation 
                reasonable value is $ tens of millions 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q3: Estimation  

Students in the United States like to storm a football field after a victory. Answer the following 
questions (Hint: You can search on the internet for the dimensions of an American college football 
field): 

a.  [3 marks] For a typical American college football field, estimate how many students can be 
on the field using a 6 ft separation rule for person-to-person separation. (demonstrate your 
structured thinking and justify your answer with a word count of 55 words) 

1 mark sourcing size of football field: 320 ft x 160 ft playing (includes end zone) or other       
students may include side lines and that is fine 

1 mark determining how to model 6 ft separation:  circle, square, packing density of 
circles are all reasonable 

1 mark for a calculation: values of 1500 to 3000 students are possible 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b.  [5 marks] Estimate the number of students on the American football field in the picture in 
Figure 2. (demonstrate your structured thinking and justify your answer with a word count 
of 55 words) 

Figure 2 Picture of students storming a football. 

1 mark:  Using the hash marks on the field (each are 1 yard) 

1 mark:  Notice that the students are closely packed together but not on the entire field 

1 mark: estimating how closely people can be packed in an area 

1 mark: estimating how much of the field is closely packed 

1 mark: calculation of result  ( 9,500 students is the ballpark) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q4: Teamwork 
When working in a team, different members bring different work styles to the team. Imagine a team of 5 
students who describe themselves as: an Amiable, an Analytical, two Expressives and a Driver. One of the 
Expressive team members, notices that the Driver team member is struggling to work with the Amiable 
team member. 

This question builds off of the lecturette on leveraging difference. The video in the last 12 minutes 
discusses tensions between styles and how they might manifest in a design team. There is an 
accompanying “inventory” handout which has descriptions of the styles and some of their 
strengths/weaknesses in the subsequent pages. These will be most helpful for getting a sense of the 
content being tested.  

a. 

[4 marks] What is a (one) challenge the driver and amiable team member might have working 
together? [100 words or less] 

The driver will want to move forward and get results faster than the amiable may be comfortable 
with. The amiable may want to spend more time in discussion ensuring everyone’s voice is being 
heard and that they reach consensus than the driver likes.  
The challenge will boil down to some tension between Driver{efficiency, progress, results/product 
focus} and Amiable{consensus, inclusion, people focused).  
2 marks for clearly stating what the challenge is, and 2 marks for explaining why it would occur 
between a driver and an amiable.  

b. 

[3 marks] What is one way of working the team could implement to mitigate this challenge? [60 
words or less] 

Many possibilities:  

Set time for reaching consensus, and a contingency plan for if it isn’t met  
 
  Have the team come to the meetings with their ideas/arguments prepped in 
advance so that the whole meeting can focus on discussion  
  Review and agree upon the importance of the decision so that it can determine 
how much time to spend on it  

As long as the way of working addresses the way the student has articulated the tension 
presented in 1, its fine.  

3 marks – 1 mark for being specific and having a clear process, 1 mark for whether it addresses the 
challenge presented in part 1, 1 mark for explanation of why.  

c. 

[4 marks] How can the Expressive team member who noticed the challenge, leverage their style 
to mitigate it? [60 words or less] 
Expressives focus on ideas and love discussion, they often will come up with out of the box 
ways to solve problems and don’t mind confrontation. Amiables, are less comfortable with 
confrontation.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The expressive could identify the challenge to the team and begin brainstorming ways to 
address it, taking over the discussion.  

The expressive (who likes a blend of product and people focus) could monitor the 
conversation to ensure both perspectives are brought to the table.  

Because they are attuned to the emotional dynamics of the team, they could speak to the 
team members individually to find out how to address it.  

2 marks for clearly stating what the approach is, and 2 marks for explaining why it 
would come from an Expressive  

Appendix A: Land Prices 

Figure A Land price in $/ft2 footprint for new construction.2018 Canadian Cost Guide, Altus Group. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B: Construction Costs 

Figure B. Construction costs for a variety of building types in various regions and cities in Canada.2018 Canadian Cost Guide, Altus Group. 

 
 
 
