APS 105S: Computer Fundamentals 

Winter 2023 

Welcome!  Computer  software  has  become  one  of  the  most  important  engineering  tools  ever 

created.  Even  in  the  last  few  years,  software  has  become  essential  in  almost  every  human 

endeavour, whether it is music, design, health care, business or entertainment. The goal of this 

course to introduce you to the basics of computer software, and show you how to use it to solve 

problems. The course is also meant to be your first taste of what engineering design really is all 

about. 

APS105 will provide you with the foundation for studying software systems in greater depth in 

later courses. You will learn how to make high-quality software through participating in lectures, 

but  most  importantly  by  the  work  you  do  for  the  laboratory  exercises.  The  main  topics  to  be 

covered  are:  the  representation  of  information,  programming  techniques,  programming  style, 

basic  loop  structures,  functions,  arrays,  strings, pointers, linked  lists,  binary  search  trees,  and 

searching and sorting algorithms. The laboratories in this course reinforce the lecture topics and 

develop essential programming skills, using the C programming language. Though we will focus 

on the C programming language, the fundamental concepts taught in this course apply to most 

modern programming languages, such as C++, Python, and Javascript. 

Learning Outcomes 

•  Learn how to write and debug practical computer programs using the C programming language 

•  Learn about basic data structures, such as linked lists and binary search trees 

University of Toronto — Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering 

 
 
 
 
•  Learn about how basic algorithms, such as searching and sorting algorithms, can be designed 

and implemented 

Instructors, Lecture Times and Office Information 

Course coordinator: Bruno Korst (LEC 0103) (Office: PT374D, Office hour TBA, Zoom meeting 

room:  https://utoronto.zoom.us/j/88508937446  --  Passcode:  aps105)  -  Lectures:  M2-3pm 

(MS2170), W2-3pm (SF1101), R2-3pm (SF1101).  

Kia  Shakiba 

(LEC101) 

(Office:  PT392,  Office  hour  TBA,  Zoom  meeting 

room: 

https://utoronto.zoom.us/j/4760321227 ) - Lectures: T12-1pm (MC254), R12-1pm (MC252), F2-

3pm (MC254)  

Salma Emara (LEC102) (Office: SF1021B, Office hour: Thursdays 12 pm to 1 pm, Zoom meeting 

room  : https://utoronto.zoom.us/j/81994733653 )  –  Lectures:  M12-1pm  (BA1170),  W12-1pm 

(BA1170), F2-3pm (BA1170) 

Philip  Anderson  (LEC104) 

(Office:  EA316,  Office  hour  TBA,  Zoom  meeting 

room:    

https://utoronto.zoom.us/j/4920918611 (passcode f7KugZ) – Lectures: M9-10am (BA1170), W2-

3pm (SF1101), R2-3pm (SF1101) 

Further  details  on  lecture  times  and  location  can  be  found  via  the  Timetable  Builder 

(ttb.utoronto.ca), under APS105H1 S Computer Fundamentals. 

Grading 

The grades in the course will be based on 9 laboratories, the midterm examination, and the final 

examination.  The  midterm  examination  will  cover  all  the  material  up  to  the  week  before  the 

Reading Week, and will take place on Tuesday Feb 28, 2023, 13:10 — 14:50, for a duration of 

100 minutes, at Examination Centre Room  EX 100 and EX 200. The final examination will be 

University of Toronto — Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering 

 
 
comprehensive, covering all the material in this course, with emphasis on material covered after 

the midterm examination.  

The  composition  of  the  final  grade  is  as  follows:  Labs  30%,  Midterm  Examination  30%,  Final 

Examination 40%. Labs 1, 2, 3 are 2% each, Labs 4, 5 and 6 are 3% each, Lab 7, 8, 9 are 5% 

each. 

Course Website 

The  website  for  this  course  (https://q.utoronto.ca/courses/288235)  can  be  found  on  Quercus, 

accessible from the University of Toronto Portal (https://q.utoronto.ca). Look for the course titled 

Computer  Fundamentals.  All  four  sections  are  in  the  same  online  course  website  —  you  can 

ignore the part of the course title labeled LEC0101. The course syllabus (this document), course 

schedule, in-class announcements, and all handouts for the labs will be accessible there. 

Course Schedule 

Lectures and tutorials begin at 10 minutes past the hour, and end at the hour. Refer to a separate 

spreadsheet  that  you  can  download  from  the  course  website  for  a  detailed  schedule  for  this 

course. 

Lab Assignments 

The crucial part of this course is to learn programming by actually doing it. We provide strong TA 

support in the labs to both help you, and to make sure you’re learning the key skills and concepts. 

You will be expected to do work on your labs on your own time. You may use your own computer 

and also use the Engineering Computing Facility (ECF) computers in room SF 1012 and 1013. 

There are 10 lab exercises in this course (including lab 0), and the lab schedule is provided to 

you in the course schedule spreadsheet, which you can download separately from the course 

University of Toronto — Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering 

 
 
website. Every lab (except Lab 0) has grades associated with it. It is essential to learn all of the 

earlier material as the later content will be based on it. 

A handout describing each assignment will be available on the course website roughly two weeks 

prior to the week in which it is due. Each lab will consist of several questions, and each question 

will  include  several  public  test  cases  for  you  to  test  your  code  with.  You  will  be  using 

https://examify.ca to test and submit your solutions for each of the questions. After the submission 

deadline (which is specified in the lab handout and also visible in examify.ca), your solutions will 

be automatically marked using a number  of test cases used for marking.  Though the test cases 

for marking are not made public, some of them will be identical to the public test cases. The output 

produced by your solutions will be checked against the output generated by the correct solutions. 

Late submissions will not be accepted and you will receive a mark of zero. 

These lab assignments will likely take a substantial amount of your time; it is important to start as 

early as possible on your assignments. You are free to discuss your approach with your fellow 

students; however you may not copy all or part of someone else’s assignment solution. All lab 

assignments you submit should be your own work. Furthermore, under the University of Toronto 

code of conduct, a person who supplies an assignment to be copied will be penalized in the same 

way. We will use software to detect copying that is quite sophisticated and so is difficult to defeat. 

Those found will be prosecuted as academic offences. (Please refer to the following link for more: 

https://www.academicintegrity.utoronto.ca/wp-

content/uploads/sites/135/2014/06/ProcessChartAI.pdf) 

In your timetable, you have been assigned a two-hour period for working on your lab assignments. 

Each lab subsection will be permanently assigned to one Teaching Assistant (TA). That TA will 

be responsible for helping you with your labs throughout this term, so it is essential to prepare 

your questions and discuss them with your lab TA during your two-hour lab period. Labs will be 

held in room SF1012 and SF1013 in the Sandford Fleming Building according to the schedule 

posted in the timetable. 

University of Toronto — Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering 

 
 
Please refer to the Timetable Builder found at https://ttb.utoronto.ca/ 

Section 

Day 

Time 

Location 

PRA 

0101 

Wednesdays 

11:00-13:00 

SF 1013 

PRA 

0102 

Thursdays 

15:00-17:00 

SF 1013 

PRA 

0103 

Mondays 

13:00-15:00 

SF 1013 

PRA 

0104 

Thursdays 

12:00-14:00 

SF 1013 

PRA 

0105 

Thursdays 

09:00-11:00 

SF1013 

PRA 

0106 

Mondays 

09:00-11:00 

SF 1013 

PRA 

0107 

Thursday 

12:00-14:00 

SF 1012 

PRA 

0108 

Fridays 

13:00-15:00 

SF1013 

The total amount of marks for the labs contribute 30% to your final grade, with earlier labs counting 

for less. However, you should not skip any labs, as the later more complex labs rely on the basic 

knowledge learned in the earlier ones. 

Lab 0 will begin in the first week of classes, but will not be marked. Starting from Lab 1, check 

your  individual  schedule  for  the  time  of  your  lab  section.  You  must  attend  your  assigned  lab 

subsection with your assigned TA. 

University of Toronto — Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Using Lab Software at Home — Visual Studio Code 

You will be using a software tool that makes it easier to develop software itself — it makes sense 

that software developers have created many software tools to help in this process. We will be 

using the Visual Studio Code, which allows you to create and edit your software, compile it (you 

will learn what that means) and then execute it. Visual Studio Code is available on the computers 

in the ECF labs, and can be easily downloaded and installed on your own computer running either 

Windows or macOS, by visiting its website https://code.visualstudio.com/. 

After downloading and installing Visual Studio Code, you will also need to install the C compiler 

and  debugger.  On  macOS,  you  can  install  them  by  running  the  following  command  in  your 

Terminal in Visual Studio Code: 

xcode-select --install 

On Windows, you will need to install minGW-w64 using MSYS2 in order to install your C compiler 

and debugger. 

You will also need to install two extensions in Visual Studio Code, called C/C++ (by Microsoft) 

and C/C++ Runner (by franneck94). Two tutorial videos — for macOS and Windows respectively 

— have been provided to you in the course website to walk you through all the steps you will need 

for installing and using Visual Studio Code to compile, run and debug C programs. Detailed step-

by-step instructions are also included in Lab 0. 

Tutorials 

There  are  8  tutorial  sections  in  this  course,  with  one  hour  per  week  on  different  schedules 

(included in the preceding table). Tutorials will begin in the week of January 17, 2022, there will 

be no tutorials scheduled in the first week (the week of January 10, 2022) of this course. 

University of Toronto — Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering 

 
 
Tutorials are conducted by a Teaching Assistant (TA) who will be prepared to discuss the material 

from the previous week’s lectures but who will also be open to questions from the class.  It is likely 

that the first 30 minutes or so will be used to introduce and discuss a few programming examples 

that you have not yet seen in class, and the next 20 minutes or so may be open for questions.  

The tutorials will be far more useful if you interact with the TA and ask him/her to explain material 

you do not understand, either from the labs or lectures. 

Section 

Day 

Time 

Location 

TUT 

0101 

Thursdays 

15:00-16:00 

BA2165 

TUT 

0102 

Mondays 

14:00-15:00 

MY330 

TUT 

0103 

Tuesdays 

12:00-13:00 

SF3201 

TUT 

0104 

Wednesdays 

10:00-11:00 

HA403 

TUT 

0105 

Fridays 

11:00-12:00 

WB130 

TUT 

0106 

Mondays 

11:00-12:00 

MY380 

TUT 

0107 

Wednesdays 

10:00-11:00 

UC163 

TUT 

0108 

Fridays 

09:00-10:00 

SF3202 

Participation in the tutorials will be mandatory. 

University of Toronto — Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plenary Lectures 

The  course  will  progress at  a  rather  fast  pace,  and  an  additional plenary  lecture  is  scheduled 

every Tuesday at 5 — 6 p.m. for all four lecture sections. The room is MY150. This plenary lecture 

is designed to focus on the labs, bonus helpful material that helps you understand the course 

even better, as well as preparation strategies for the midterm and final examination.  The plenary 

lecture will be taught sometimes by the instructors and sometimes by the tutorial TAs.  Though 

the lecture is optional, it is highly recommended for you to attend, especially if you find it difficult 

to follow the regular lectures in the course. 

The weekly plenary lecture starts on January 17, 2021.  

Textbook 

This  course  has  no  textbook.  You  are  welcome  to  select  a  textbook  from  the  many  available 

alternatives that suits your entry programming level and learning style. We found no textbook that 

would  support  both  a  beginner  programmer  and  one  that  already  had  some  programming 

knowledge. Use a search engine (like Google) to check out available titles. 

Professor  Salma  Emara  has  prepared  an  excellent  resource  for  the  APS105  students,  which 

follows  the  flow  of  topics  presented  in  the  course.  Feel  free  to  use  it  as  a  reference: 

https://learningc.org/cover.html 

Another  good  example  that  is  free  provided  that  you  subscribe  to  their  free  newsletter: 

https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/the-c-beginners-handbook/.  It  covers  the  basics  but  does 

not cover the more advanced topics we will cover towards the end of the term. 

We invite you to look for high-quality online sources introducing the C programming language, 

and to share them on the Piazza discussion forum for this course (see the next section). 

University of Toronto — Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering 

 
 
Course Discussion Forum 

If you have any questions that are not specific to you and are likely of interest to your classmates 

as well:, you are invited to post them on the Piazza discussion forum for this course. You can post 

anonymously  to  your  classmates  (but  not  to  the  instructors).  Piazza  is  the  fastest  way  to  get 

answers to your questions, so use it! 

To sign up on the Piazza discussion forum, use the following link: 

https://piazza.com/utoronto.ca/winter2023/aps105h1s 

The Piazza page for the course is found here: https://piazza.com/class/lcgnjpjimjl20x 

If you would like clarifications or explanations of laboratory assignments, do not wait until your 

scheduled lab section. You should first check the Piazza discussion forum — someone else may 

have asked the same question already. Fellow students may also help you out by replying to your 

questions. Even if you do not have a question about a lab, it is a good idea to check the Piazza 

discussion forum from time to time. You may see a question or a response there that will make 

you realize that there is some feature of the lab that you had never considered. We will be using 

the  Piazza  website only as  a discussion  forum  — note  that all  course announcements  will be 

made using the Quercus course website only. 

If you are considering posting a question to the discussion forum, you should do two things before 

doing so. First, try to read the current entries to see if your question has already been asked and 

answered. Second, you should make sure that your question is as clear as you can make it. 

Petitions and Re-marking Requests 

If you miss a lab assignment or the midterm examination for a valid reason, you need to submit a 

petition to the First Year office, which will then be validated and sent to your instructor. The online 

University of Toronto — Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering 

 
 
petition  should  be  sent  to  the  First  Year  office  within  5  days  of  the  event,  and  include 

documentation. 

If you believe that your lab assignments or midterm examination were not marked correctly, you 

need to submit a re-marking request form within two weeks, with detailed reasons in writing. The 

re-marking request form can be downloaded from the course website. 

Academic Integrity Policies 

In developing solutions to labs, you may wish to discuss your approach to the solution with your 

fellow students. This is fine as long as the final solution is yours alone. You should never copy 

your lab solutions or let another student copy yours, not even a portion of them. You should not 

post any of your assignment questions in a private or public online discussion forum or website in 

order to solicit solutions from others. You should not allow any other student to read any portions 

of your solution, either by sharing a computer screen, or by sharing portions of the code remotely 

via instant messaging or social networking web sites. Note that, under the University of Toronto 

code of conduct, a person who supplies an assignment to be copied will be penalized in the same 

way.  We  will use modern  software  to detect  copying  that  is  quite  sophisticated  and difficult  to 

defeat. 

If  you  use  an  online  source,  rather  than  developing  the  code  yourself,  this  is  also  cheating, 

although  it  is  expected  that  students  will  use  online  sources  to  check usage and  examples of 

various C language constructs. If you do copy an online source you run the risk that others may 

also do so, or that the online source is included in the plagiarism detection system. Either way, 

copying will be detected and processed as in the paragraph above. 

For both the midterm and final examination, you must do these yourself and must not supply or 

obtain answers or share information with other students. We may use methods to detect such 

exchanges and will send the matters to the academic integrity representatives for the faculty. 

University of Toronto — Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering 

 
 
For more details, please refer to: https://www.academicintegrity.utoronto.ca/  

Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters: 

https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/secretariat/policies/code-behaviour-academic-matters-july-

1-2019  

Getting Help 

Although you may never have needed extra help in school before, you may well find that you 

need assistance in this course. Even if you have heard that it is hard to find help at university, the 

truth is that help is readily available in a number of forums. 

• Tutorials. Although TA’s are given topics for discussion in the tutorials, questions from students 

are more than welcome. Questions should be of a type that might be of interest to other students 

in the class. 

• Piazza discussion forum. Don’t be afraid to post a question on the discussion forum — many 

others may be experiencing the same difficulty. 

•  Office  hours.  As  noted earlier,  your  instructor  is available  for extra help during  regular  office 

hours. 

• Lecture recordings. Some lecture recordings will be posted for your reference after the lectures. 

Email 

Please make sure that you check your University of Toronto mail account on a daily basis. You 

are required to read your email messages that are sent to you at your University of Toronto email 

address  as  it  may  contain  important  announcements  from  the  First  Year  Office,  the  ECE 

Undergraduate Office, or from an instructor or coordinator of this course. 

University of Toronto — Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering 

 
 
Additional Information and Resources 

Statement on Inclusivity, Equity and Diversity at the University of Toronto 

The University of Toronto commits to all students, faculty and staff that you can learn, work and 

create  in  a  welcoming,  respectful  and  inclusive  environment.  In  this  class,  we  embrace  the 

broadest range of people and encourage their diverse perspectives. This team environment is 

how we will innovate and improve our collective academic success. You can read the evidence 

for this approach.  

We  expect  each  of  us  to  take  responsibility  for  the  impact  that  our  language,  actions  and 

interactions  have  on  others.  Engineering  denounces  discrimination,  harassment  and 

unwelcoming behaviour in all its forms. If you experience or witness any form of harassment or 

discrimination, including but not limited to, acts of racism, sexism, Islamophobia, anti-Semitism, 

homophobia,  transphobia,  ableism  and  ageism,  please  tell  someone  so  we  can  intervene. 

Engineering takes these reports extremely seriously. You can disclose incidents of discrimination 

or harassment to our Assistant Dean, Diversity, Inclusion and Professionalism. You can also talk 

to anyone you feel comfortable approaching, including your instructor, your TA, or the First Year 

Office. 

Accessibility Services 

The  University of  Toronto  supports accommodations  for  students  with diverse  learning  needs, 

which may be associated with mental health conditions, learning disabilities, autism spectrum, 

ADHD,  mobility  impairments,  functional/fine  motor  impairments,  concussion  or  head  injury, 

blindness  and  low  vision,  chronic  health  conditions,  addictions,  deafness  and  hearing  loss, 

communication disorders and/or temporary disabilities, such as fractures and severe sprains, or 

recovery from an operation. If you have a learning need requiring an accommodation, please visit 

https://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca/ as soon as possible. 

Mental Health Awareness 

University of Toronto — Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering 

 
 
As a university student, you may experience a range of health and/or mental health challenges 

that  could  result  in  significant  barriers  to  achieving  your  personal  and  academic  goals.  The 

University of Toronto and the Faculty of Applied Science & Engineering offer a wide range of free 

and confidential services that could assist you during these times. We encourage you to seek out 

these resources early and often.  

Student Life Website: https://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca  

Health and Wellness Website: https://studentlife.utoronto.ca/hwc  

If,  at  some  point  during  the  year,  you  find  yourself  feeling  distressed  and  in  need  of  more 

immediate support, the Feeling Distressed Webpage: https://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca/feeling-

distressed, will have more campus resources for you to use.  

Immediate help is available 24/7 through Good2Talk, a post-secondary student helpline at 1-866-

925-5454. 

All students in the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering have an Academic Advisor who 

can advise on academic and personal matters.  You can find your department’s Academic Advisor 

here: 

https://undergrad.engineering.utoronto.ca/advising-support-services/academic-advising/  

Land Acknowledgement  

We wish to acknowledge this land on which the University of Toronto operates. For thousands of 

years it has been the traditional land of the Huron-Wendat, the Seneca, and most recently, the 

Mississaugas of the Credit River. Today, this meeting place is still the home to many Indigenous 

people from across Turtle Island and we are grateful to have the opportunity to work on this land. 

University of Toronto — Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering 

 
 
