UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO 
FACULTY OF APPLIED SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING 
APS100 FINAL TEST – December 6th 1:30pm-2:30pm 
1 HOUR 

INSTRUCTORS:  D. Kilkenny, M. Stickel, C. Variawa 

------------------CROWDMARK ID BOX WILL GO HERE------------------ 

------------------CROWDMARK ID BOX WILL GO HERE------------------ 

------------------CROWDMARK ID BOX WILL GO HERE------------------ 

------------------CROWDMARK ID BOX WILL GO HERE------------------ 

------------------CROWDMARK ID BOX WILL GO HERE------------------ 

**DO NOT REMOVE THE STAPLE** 

Do not begin this test unless asked to do so.  Do not continue writing once the time is 
complete.  Disregarding these rules will constitute an academic violation.  
No unauthorized aids. 

PLEASE WRITE CLEARLY AND LEGIBLY 

●  Students are wholly responsible for the content and quality of this submission.  
●  Do not separate the pages. 
●  Writing that is illegible (if we can’t read it) will not be graded accurately. 
●  This is an independent, closed-book assessment. 
●  Writing in black or blue pen is strongly encouraged.  
●  Students must include their multiple-choice answers on the separate bubble sheet at 

the end of the exam to be graded.   

●  No textbooks, notes, or other aids.  The Aid Sheet is the only exception. 

Time allotted:  1h 00min 

Part 

1 

2 

3 

Total 

Maximum Mark 
14 marks  
(2 marks per question, 7 questions) 
16 marks 
(8 marks per question, 2 questions) 
20 marks 
(20 marks per question, 1 question) 
50 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS PAGE IS NOT GRADED AND CAN BE USED FOR ROUGH NOTES 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
PART 1. [14 marks] - Multiple Choice 

ALL MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS MUST BE ANSWERED ON THE 
BUBBLE SHEET ATTACHED TO THE END OF THIS EXAM PACKAGE.  

Instructions: Students MUST write their correct response on the final page of the test (the 
“bubble sheet”) for their grade to be valid.  Do not write your multiple-choice answer on this 
question sheet as it will not be graded.  We are not responsible for students failing to do this. 

Important note for Part One: this is the multiple-choice part of the test.  Please review your 
question(s) carefully, and submit only one (1) most-appropriate response.  Each correct 
response is worth two (2) marks.  

P1 Q1: Given the list below, select which items would be considered academic offenses 
according to the U of T Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. 

1.  Falsifying documents 
2.  Using unauthorized aids 
3.  Impersonating another person 

a)  Items 1, 4, and 5 
b)  Item 2 
c)  Items 1, 2, 3, and 4 
d)  Items 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 

4.  Plagiarism and/or submitting work 
that has been submitted before 

5.  Assisting another student in 

committing an offense

P1 Q2: Consider the two items below.  Select the answer below that best describes plagiarism. 

1.  Using someone else’s ideas or expression of the ideas (e.g. words). 
2.  Representing the ideas as your own original ideas or failing to attribute the ideas to their 

proper source using conventional writing styles. 

a)  Either item is sufficient to constitute plagiarism. 
b)  Neither item constitutes plagiarism. 
c)  Only item 1 constitutes plagiarism. 
d)  Only item 2 constitutes plagiarism. 

P1 Q3: Which of the following is false regarding positionality? 

a)  Positionality affects our intersectionality 
b)  Positionality describes our view on the world 
c)  Positionality differences often lead to conflict 
d)  Positionality is an important consideration in engineering work 

P1 Q4: For the statements below, which statement or statements are examples of unethical conduct? 

1.  Reviewing the work of a co-worker with their knowledge 
2.  Paying a commission to subcontractors to provide an incentive for cost discounts 
3.  Preparing a contract to procure services 
4.  Managing a project to avoid the possibility of a product lawsuit 
5.  Determining whether a contractor should be paid based on inspection of their work 

a)  Statement 1  
b)  Statement 2 
c)  Statements 2, 4, and 5 
d)  Statements 2, 3, and 4 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P1 Q5: Consider the Professional Engineers of Ontario Code of Ethics.  Which of the following 
statements does this Code state is “the duty of a practitioner to … act at all times with: ”? 

4.  Clarity and honesty in all communications  
5.  Knowledge of developments in the area 

of professional engineering relevant to 
any services that are undertaken 

6.  Fidelity to public needs 

1.  Fairness and loyalty to the practitioner's 

associates, employers, clients, 
subordinates and employees 

2.  Ensure the correct processes, tools, and 
approaches are applied throughout the 
engineering design cycle 

3.  Devotion to high ideals of personal 
honour and professional integrity 

a)  Statements 1, 2, 3, and 4 
b)  Statements 1, 3, 5, and 6 
c)  Statements 3, 4, and 6 
d)  Statements 1, 3, 4, and 5 

P1 Q6: The Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering conducted a census on their current 
student population to determine the demographics of engineering students. It was discovered 
that less than three percent of first year engineering students are Indigenous. As such, the 
Faculty decided to create an entrance scholarship targeted towards Indigenous students and 
did targeted outreach at high schools with a high population of Indigenous students to 
encourage more Indigenous applicants to UofT. This is primarily an example of: 

a)  Equality 
b)  Diversity 
c)  Equity 
d)  Inclusivity 

P1 Q7: The Pomodoro technique is best described as: 
a)  A method of solving challenging problems  
b)  An approach for considering the ethical nature of a particular situation 
c)  A technique that supports the creation of inclusive spaces 
d)  A process for managing one’s time and staying focused on a single task 

ALL MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS MUST BE ANSWERED ON THE 
SHEET ATTACHED TO THE END OF THIS EXAM PACKAGE.  

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART 2. [16 marks] – Short Answers 

All students are to write their response to P2 Q1 and P2 Q2 in the spaces provided below. The 
total number of words in each response must not be greater than the size of each box. Please 
use full sentences in your responses, and answer to the best of your ability.  No citations, 
references, graphics, or tables in your response. This part is worth 16 marks, with 8 marks per 
question.   

P2 Q1: Consider the following situation: For the first Engineering Strategies and Practice II 
(APS112) deliverable, your team needs to submit a research proposal. However, you wrote 
something similar in Engineering Strategies and Practice I (APS111) so you copy and paste 
your work and change some of the material to be relevant to the new project. A week after 
submission your team is notified of receiving an academic offence.  
i) Briefly describe the academic offence that has been committed. ii) Describe how the offence 
was likely detected. iii) Describe the importance of not committing such an academic offence.  

Write your answer in this box. 

P2 Q2: Identify one topic discussed in APS100H1 Lectures and/or Tutorials that you believe to 
be related to an area of personal strength. Concisely describe how you will best implement this 
asset as you continue your undergraduate Engineering journey, as well as the importance of 
sharing this skill in supporting your Engineering colleagues. 

Write your answer in this box. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
PART 3. [20 marks] – Long Answer 

Please select a Learning Outcome from each major category (A, and B).   

Then, please describe some of the major topics we discussed in lecture and/or tutorial 
from these areas, your development in these areas, and how you plan to continue your 
learning in these areas after the course is complete. 

Engineering Community and Co-curricular Opportunities 
A1. Identify, locate and understand how to utilize resources such as your 
professors, teaching assistants, academic advisors, and peers to 
support your academic journey. 

A2. Recognize how extra and co-curricular opportunities, academic pathways, 
undergraduate research, and work integrated learning can support your 
academic success. 

A3. Describe types of career pathways available to an engineering student and 

graduate. 

Please pick ONE of the Learning Outcomes from the “A” list. 

[P3Q1]:   I have selected:  

__
__ 

Professional Conduct, Equity, Engineering Ethics, and the 
Engineering Résumé 
B1. Define academic integrity and the Student Code of Conduct and 
recognize how it applies to the first-year course experience. 

B2. Describe the fundamental principles of equity, equality, and inclusion and 
incorporate these into your practice as a U of T Engineering student. 

B3. Describe the essential elements of ethics in engineering and professional 
engineering practice and apply the PEO and IEEE Codes of Ethics to 
specific scenarios. 

B4. Recognize important components of an engineering résumé and develop a 

personal engineering résumé. 

Please pick ONE of the Learning Outcomes from the “B” list. 

[P3Q2]:   I have selected:  

__
__ 

Part three continues on the next page…  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[P3Q3 20-MARKS]  
In the box below, please write an email to the Teaching Assistant (TA) grading your 
work.  The person reading your email is not your TA from your tutorial, but rather, they 
are the same individual who has been grading all of your work to-date in this course.   

In this email, your goal is to convince the reader that you understand the two learning 
outcomes you selected on the previous page.   

In writing this email, it is suggested that you describe some of the topics you discussed 
in lecture and/or tutorial, how you have demonstrated your personal development in 
these areas with specific examples, what you have yet to learn in these areas, and how 
you plan to continue your learning in these areas after the course is complete.  

Please write your response in the box below.  Any writing outside of this box will not be 
graded.  Please write neatly and clearly; if we can’t read it, we can’t grade it. 

From:   
To: APS100@engineering.utoronto.ca 
Date:  
Subject:  

Email: 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS PAGE IS NOT GRADED AND CAN BE USED  
FOR ROUGH NOTES IF YOU WANT.   
THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE READ. 

DO NOT SEPARATE ANY PAGES. 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
