University of Toronto 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
APS112 and APS113 Engineering Strategies and Practice 
Quiz #1 February 14, 2017 

This is a 50-minute quiz. The quiz is closed book and closed notes. The quiz has a total 
of 23 questions (20 multiple-choice and 3 short-answer questions), worth 41 marks. The 
questions are divided between two booklets.  

Question Booklet #2 – Short-Answer Question Booklet 

First Name: 
Last Name: 
UTOR Email: 

  @mail.utoronto.ca 

There are 3 short-answer questions, worth 21 marks in total. These must be answered 
in the spaces provided in this Short-Answer Question Booklet. This question booklet, 
with your name and UTOR Email filled in, must be returned with the multiple-choice 
answer sheet slipped inside. Do not separate any pages. Do not write on the QR code 
at the top of the pages. We are not looking for long paragraph answers. Use short 
sentences or bullet points. 

All short-answer questions refer to the following client statement. 

Client Statement #2 – Photovoltaic Cells 
Performance of photovoltaic systems greatly degrade as dust and dirt adhere to the 
panels. As a result, water based washing systems have been developed to clean 
photovoltaic systems. Unfortunately, many locations which are suitable to photovoltaic 
systems have limited water availability (sunny skies means no rain). Design a water 
efficient method for keeping large photovoltaic power systems clean. 

Page 1 of 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Cleaning of 200 W Photovoltaic Panels by Brian 
Kusler 
(https://www.flickr.com/photos/briankusler/2447511232/in
/photostream/) 

1.  (7 MARKS) Give ONE primary function, TWO important objectives, and ONE 
important constraint for Client Statement #2 – Photovoltaic Cells. Metrics are 
required for the objectives and constraint, but you do not need to include goals or 
limits.  

PRIMARY FUNCTION: 

OBJECTIVE 1: 

   Metric: 

OBJECTIVE 2: 

   Metric: 

Page 2 of 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONSTRAINT: 

   Metric:  

Page 3 of 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  (7 MARKS) While designing a solution for Client Statement #2 – Photovoltaic Cells, 

you need to know the amount of water consumed washing panels at the 550 
Megawatt (MW) Desert Sunlight Solar Farm in the Mojave Desert. If the panels are 
washed twice a week in the traditional way, estimate the annual water consumption 
for this task in Litres. Use reasonable assumptions based on your personal 
knowledge and the information provided here. You don’t have to get an exact 
answer, but you do have to compute a number and demonstrate structured 
thinking.   

Page 4 of 5 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
3.  (7 MARKS) Given Client Statement #2 – Photovoltaic Cells, provide a Functional 

Decomposition of the cleaning device.  

a. In your Functional Decomposition identify the Primary Function, three 
subfunctions, and at least one viable solution for each subfunction.  

b. Use these viable solutions to propose an overall solution. 

Page 5 of 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
