Written Answer (marks per question as indicated on question; 14 marks total) 

Write answers into the spaces provided on the question paper. 

Client Statement #1 (Questions 17-22) 
I use a motorized wheelchair (see figure 1) to get from my car 
to the baseball diamond to watch my daughter’s baseball 
games. Some of the parks where the games are played do not 
have paved access from the street to the diamonds. Often I 
have to try to cross grass and sometimes mud using my 
wheelchair to get to the baseball diamond. More than once I 
have gotten stuck in a dip in the grass or in some mud. Once I 
even tipped over. I need you to redesign my wheelchair to increase its motor to 300 horsepower 
to keep me from getting stuck. The motor must be mounted on the bottom of the chair to keep the 
center of mass low and keep me from tipping over. The structure of the chair will need to be 
strengthened to handle the additional weight of the motor and the torque it will apply when 
running. Titanium is stronger than steel and so you can use less of it so it will save money. Please 
use tricks like this to keep costs low. Try to keep the new chair from costing more than my 
existing chair. I want mud flaps to keep me clean if I go through a puddle, and a drink holder.  

**Note from Course Coordinator to markers: These are guidelines. Consult with me if any 
specific issues arise that don’t fit these answers.** 

17. (2 mark) The functional basis for this project is:  to 

Noun 
mass 
energy 
information 

Verb 
•  Sense, detect, indicate, identify 
•  Support, maintain, secure, steady, hold constant 
•  Combine, connect, join, mix, merge, bond 
•  Separate, split, detach, parse 
•  Store, deposit, place 
•  Extract, remove, mine, retrieve, recover 
•  Transport, transmit, convey, move, channel, rotate 
•  Transform, convert, alter, modify, adapt 
•  Control 

2 marks: Transport, covey, move  mass 
1.5 marks: support, transmit, channel 
1 mark: control, transform, convert, alter, modify, adapt, place, deposit  mass 
0.5 marks: anything else from the table above 
0 marks: Uses wheelchair or user instead of mass  

mass 

APS112 & APS113 – Quiz #1 – 2013 – Answer Key 

Page 1 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
Modifiers 
-0.5 additional qualifier 
…safety and efficiently transport the mass across the soft grassy area. 
Synonyms: if the verb or noun used is not on the list, but is a close synonym you can give it a -
0.5 penalty and then grade it as if it were on the table. EX. Matter instead of mass; transfer 
instead of transport 

18. (2 marks) What is the purpose of defining the functional basis at the start of a project? 

One sentence will be fine. One of the following or similar will get 2 marks. 

To dissect an engineering design problem and understand it from a functional perspective. 
To have an abstract / high level definition of the problem that keeps the design space open.  
Helps identify the underlying functionality of the design.  
Identify comparable technologies to use as analogies. 
To scope the project while keeping the design space as open as possible. 
To understand the client’s fundamental need. 

Give partial marks if they don’t quite say one of these examples, but they are close. 

19. (2 mark) Give one stakeholder and state their interest. 

1 Mark for each (must have one stakeholder and one interest) 
**If multiple stakeholders are given grade the top one in the list and don’t look at the others.** 

Daughter  
Disable rights organizations   – Bettering the lives of disabled people 
NGO’s  

– Family value; sports 

– Better the lives of disabled people 
– Encourage use of public parks 
– Avoid unnecessary work 

Grounds caretakers  
Wheelchair manufacturers   – Increase profit; diversify product line; recruit more customers 
– Developing productive citizens 
Government  
– Support self-sufficiency of disable 
– Encourage use of Public Park 
- Family values; self-sufficiency; live life ‘normally’; independence 

Client / User*   
*Textbook says no, but we’ll give them grades. 

No marks 
Better wheelchair 
Avoid getting stuck 
Avoid tipping over 
Have a drink holder 

APS112 & APS113 – Quiz #1 – 2013 – Answer Key 

Page 2 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.  (3 marks) Give one primary function, one objective and one constraint for the project. 

They only need to give you one of each, but I gave several examples of each.  

Primary Function:  Support user; Move user; transport user (client will work as well) 

Objective:  Inexpensive; Minimize sinking into soft surfaces 

Constraint:  Retro fit of existing wheelchair; [wheelchair regulations] 

NO: Low centre of mass; 300 hp; Use titanium; more power 

21. (3 Marks) Use the Pugh method to select which of these three alternatives methods for 
opening a bottle of root beer best meets the following objectives (show your work):  

•  Minimal training 
•  Safe 
• 

Inexpensive 

Bottle opener 

Spoon 

Chainsaw 

Minimal Training 
Safe 
Inexpensive 
Sum + 
Sum S 
Sum - 

Total 

S 
S 
S 
0 
3 
0 
0 

-1 
-1 
+1 
1 
0 
-2 
-1 

-1 
-1 
-1 
0 
0 
-3 
-3 

**Methodology is the important thing, not the exact ratings though the chainsaw definitely 
required more training, is more expensive and is much less safe.** 

**If they used different notation than -1, S, +1 that is fine as long as they are still doing a 
pairwise comparison of the alternatives. I.E. -1, 0, +1; 1, 2, 3 are both OK. ** 

The alternative that best meets the stated objectives is 

Bottle Opener (or Spoon) [**depends 
on result of correct Pugh Method**] 

because 

though it is slightly more expensive then the spoon it is slightly safer and easier to use. 

APS112 & APS113 – Quiz #1 – 2013 – Answer Key 

Page 3 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
**No marks for Q. #21 if they didn’t do a correct Pugh Method.** 

22. (2 marks) In general explain a limitation of the Pugh method. 

The Pugh method assumes an equal weighting for all objectives. The example above treats safety 
equally important to minimal training.   

APS112 & APS113 – Quiz #1 – 2013 – Answer Key 

Page 4 of 4 

 
 
 
