University of Toronto 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
Final Examination, December 05, 2014 
Duration: 2.5 hours 
APS111H1 F and APS113Y1 Y - Engineering Strategies & Practice 1 

Calculator Type: 4 (No electronic or mechanical devices permitted) 
Exam Type: A (Closed book, no aids permitted) 
Course Coordinator: Jason Bazylak 
Communication Coordinator: Melanie Stevenson 
Module B Coordinator: Jacinta O’Brien 

Instructions: 
This is a closed book exam; no calculators or aids are permitted, except for a translation-only 
dictionary, i.e., direct word-to-word translations but no definitions.  

Fill out both the answer sheet (bubble sheet) and the exam booklet (blank lined booklet) with 
your name, student number, course (APS111 or ASP113), and date of examination. You do 
not need to fill out the course instructor or form code.  

There are two parts of the exam: multiple-choice questions and a writing component. Read 
each question carefully. 

Multiple Choice: 
The first part of the exam is a multiple-choice component. For each question provide the 
most correct answer on the answer sheet. Only one answer is to be given for each 
question. There is no penalty for incorrect answers. Be sure to fill out the answer sheet 
clearly, with no overlaps, using a pencil. Do NOT answer on these 17 exam pages. Erase 
any errors completely. There are a total of 32 multiple-choice questions worth a total of 60 
marks. The mark value of each multiple choice question is about 1.9 marks. 

Written Answers: 
The second part of the exam is a writing component. There are 4 written questions worth a 
total of 40 marks. The mark value of each question is indicated on the question. Answer 
each written question in the blank exam booklet, NOT these 17 exam pages.  

Page 1 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 1: 

Multiple-choice questions (32 questions; 60 marks total)  

1. 

2. 

3. 

"Power Felt", a product developed by researchers at Wake Forest University, is made 
up of multiple layers of low cost fabric and has been successfully proven to power a 
cellular phone by using body heat. With "Power Felt", consumers can now power their 
cellular phones using an energy supply that is: 
a.  Sustainable. 
b.  Renewable. 
c.  Profitable. 
d.  Equitable. 

"People, planet, profit", "triple bottom line", and "economy, environment, society" all 
relate to the concept of:  
a.  Life cycle assessment. 
b.  Industrial ecology. 
c.  Sustainability. 
d.  Adaptive capacity. 

The payback period is defined as the time: 
a.  Required to recover investment costs. 
b.  Needed for external costs to equal internal benefits. 
c.  Over which alternative designs should be compared. 
d.  That banks allow loans to be repaid. 

4.  Which statement best describes bio-magnification? 

a.  The entry of persistent toxic substances into the environment. 
b.  The entry of persistent toxic substances into the fatty tissues of organisms. 
c.  The concentration in the tissues of an organism of substances occurring in the 

environment.  

d.  The increase in the concentration of a substance in the tissues of organisms at 

successively higher levels in a food chain. 

5. 

In Canada, engineering is a self-regulated profession. This means that: 
a.  Engineers who hold the designation P.Eng. determine the appropriate standard of 

professional competence. 

b.  Only engineers who hold the designation P.Eng. may practice engineering. 
c.  Engineers who seal their work can be liable if something goes wrong. 
d.  Government-appointed commissions are needed to determine who is to blame 

when failures occur. 

6. 

For decision-making models, which of the following statements is TRUE? 
a.  Multi-voting is better than the Pugh Method. 
b.  Risk-based Methods yield a high level of confidence in the result. 
c.  A graphic decision chart and a weighted decision matrix are equally complex to use. 
d.  None of the above. 

Page 2 of 17 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
7. 

The Club of Rome made which one of the following conclusions? 
a.  A framework is required to measure and report on private sector performance using 

economic, environmental and social parameters. 

b.  James Watt invented the steam engine, which resulted in the industrial revolution. 
c.  Continued resource depletion and increasing pollutant emissions would lead to 

economic and social collapse. 

d.  Sustainable development meets the needs of the present without compromising the 

ability of future generations to meet their own needs. 

8.  Which of the following is a non-governmental organization:  

a.  Bank of Canada. 
b.  Ontario Ministry of Transportation. 
c.  Toronto Stock Exchange. 
d.  Professional Engineers Ontario. 

9.  Referring to Figure 1, which of the following statements is TRUE?  

a.  Line AB=fixed costs; Line CD=total costs; Area E=loss; Area F=revenue. 
b.  Line AB=total costs; Line CD=revenues; Area E=profit; Area F=loss. 
c.  Line AB=fixed costs; Line CD=total costs; Area E=loss; Area F=profit. 
d.  Line AB=total costs; Line CD=revenues; Area E=loss; Area F=profit. 

Figure 1. Chart for Question 9. 

10.  Which of the following quotations does NOT describe the shift system-centered, 

Human-Tech, design? 
a.  “If a system doesn’t work for people it doesn’t work.”  
b.  “Human error is systematically connected to features of tools, tasks and operating 
environment. Progress on safety comes from understanding and influencing these 
connections.” 

c.  “Human error is a symptom of trouble deeper inside the system.” 
d.  “The system in which people work is basically safe; success is intrinsic. The chief 

threat to safety comes from the inherent unreliability of people.” 

Page 3 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
11.  Which of the following statements about simple interest calculations and compound 

interest calculations is TRUE? 
a.  Simple interest calculations are the inverse of Compound interest calculations. 
b.  Simple interest calculations apply only to the present value, and Compound interest 

calculations apply to the present value and the interest on the present value. 
c.  Simple interest calculations yield greater future values than Compound interest 

calculations for the same number of interest periods and interest rate. 

d.  Simple interest calculations are only used for simple engineering projects, and 
Compound interest calculations are used for complex engineering projects. 

Questions 12 to 31 pertain to Case Study #1: F.G. Gardiner Expressway located in the 
Appendix. 

12.  Ontario is the only province in Canada that requires bridge owners to inspect their 

bridges every two years. The relevant legislation is Ontario Regulation 104/97, made 
under the Public Transportation and Highway Improvement Act. The Act requires 
owners to use the Ontario Structure Inspection Manual (OSIM) as a guide to determine 
the structural integrity, safety and condition of bridges. For elevated sections (bridges) 
on the Expressway, which statement is TRUE? 
a.  The City must comply with Ontario Regulation 104/97, but does not need to use the 

OSIM because it is a guideline. 

b.  The City must comply with Ontario Regulation 104/97, and Expressway bridges 

must be inspected every two years using OSIM. 

c.  The City has hired a professional engineer to inspect the Expressway bridges and 

can rely on them to decide how to conduct the bridge inspection. 

d.  The City does not need to comply with Ontario Regulation 104/97 because the City 

has its own by-laws. 

13.  The purpose of Ontario Regulation 104/97 is to ensure that bridges are safe to use, 

and the Regulation requires that bridge inspections shall be performed under the 
direction of a professional engineer. This is an example of:  
a.  Application of the precautionary principle. 
b.  Using laws to implement social policy. 
c.  Law-makers and engineers working together. 
d.  Demand-side legislation. 

<<Questions continue on next page>> 

Page 4 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
14.  Asphalt cement is a product of crude oil distillation. Emissions generated during the 
production and application of asphalt cement contain substances such as polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are potentially harmful to the health of workers at 
petrochemical facilities and road paving operations. According to the United States 
Environmental Protection Agency, PAHs can stay in the environment for long periods of 
time and, once ingested, PAHs can spread to organs including the kidneys and liver. 
However, PAHs will leave the body through urine and feces in a matter of days. Based 
on the preceding information, which statement best describes PAHs?  
a.  Persistent, bioaccumulative, toxic. 
b.  Persistent, non-bioaccumulative, toxic. 
c.  Non-persistent, bioaccumulative, toxic. 
d.  Non-persistent, non-bioaccumulative, toxic. 

15.  Figure 2 shows some of the bridge components that must be inspected in order to 
comply with O. Reg. 104/97. The City hired a professional engineer to inspect the 
eastern part of the elevated section of the Expressway, and the professional engineer 
used OSIM but did not inspect the Pier Cap. The professional engineer prepared a 
report but did not seal it. Six months later, one end of the Pier Cap broke off suddenly, 
with the result that the elevated roadway over the Pier Cap collapsed and two cars 
smashed through the guardrails and crashed into the Don River. Which statement best 
characterizes the actions of the professional engineer: 
a.  Failed to comply with O. Reg. 104/97. 
b.  Failed to comply with O. Reg. 104/97 and the Professional Engineers Act. 
c.  Disregarded public safety for personal profit. 
d.  Cannot be held liable because the report was not sealed. 

Figure 2. Bridge components that must be inspected 
according to O. Reg. 104/97 (see Question 13). 
[Source: http://www.mto.gov.on.ca/english/bridges/] 

Page 5 of 17 

 
 
 
 
16.  The City of Toronto has design standards for both hot mix asphalt and concrete when 
using these materials for road construction. Recently, the City of Toronto published a 
study, titled "Toronto's Future Weather and Climate Driver Study", which predicted that 
the average annual temperature in Toronto will increase by 4.4C by the year 2049. As 
the design engineer working on the design of the new elevated bridge deck, what 
should you do?  
a.  Not worry about the temperature in 2049 because the service life of the bridge deck 

is less than 35 years. 

b.  Choose concrete for the bridge deck because it is less susceptible to temperature 

changes than hot mix asphalt. 

c.  Add extra hot mix asphalt to the bridge deck design to allow for temperature-related 

deformation. 

d.  Ensure the material chosen for the bridge deck can meet performance targets at the 

higher future temperature conditions. 

17.  The Gardiner Expressway and Lakeshore Boulevard East Environmental Assessment 
is considering four options: maintain, improve, replace, and remove. Local community 
groups favour the option to remove the elevated section of the Expressway because 
they believe it offers a number of benefits, namely: it will provide better access to Lake 
Ontario, reduce the number of vehicles using the Expressway, and increase the 
amount of land that can be redeveloped for social housing. As the design engineer who 
is working for the City of Toronto, you are responsible for evaluating the options. What 
should you do?  
a.  Include the input of the local community groups by estimating the value of the 

benefits they have identified and including the estimated value of the benefits in 
your option evaluation of the options. 

b.  Confirm that the benefits identified by the local community groups are realistic. 
c.  Ignore the local community groups since they have much less influence on the 

design than the City of Toronto. 

d.  Report on the benefits identified by the local community groups to City Council and 

ask City Council to vote on the option to remove the elevated section. 

18.  Used rubber tires have become an important constituent in roadway paving. For 

example, used rubber tires are ground up to produce a granular material, and then 
used as a substitute for the quarry-mined aggregate base over which the asphalt is 
laid. Which of the 3Rs does this practice satisfy? 
a.  Reduce. 
b.  Reduce and reuse. 
c.  Reduce and recycle. 
d.  Reduce, reuse, and recycle. 

Page 6 of 17 

 
 
 
 
19.  Figure 3 shows the ranking summary for the four options considered as part of the 

Gardiner Expressway and Lakeshore Boulevard East Reconfiguration Environmental 
Assessment. A main drawback of the approach that was used is that: 
a.  Too few alternatives were evaluated. 
b.  Stakeholders were not consulted during the EA process. 
c.  Too many criteria were used to compare the alternatives. 
d.  The relative importance of each criterion was not considered in the evaluation.   

Figure 3. Gardiner Expressway EA Criteria Group Ranking (see Question 17).  
[Source: http://app.toronto.ca/tmmis/viewAgendaItemHistory.do?item=2014.PW29.2] 

20.  The City is considering an innovative, accelerated approach for rehabilitating the 

western part of the Expressway. The approach uses conventional construction 
methods for the at-grade section and prefabricated deck and girder components for the 
elevated section. If this approach is used, the City will have to increase the project 
budget by $400 million over 10 years. However, the higher project budget will be offset 
by a reduction in user impact costs of $3 billion, and the construction period will be 
shorter. The statement that best describes the innovative, accelerated approach is: 
a.  Time is money. 
b.  Life cycle assessment. 
c.  Design impact on society. 
d.  Sustainable development. 

Page 7 of 17 

 
 
 
 
21.  As part of the Gardiner Expressway and Lakeshore Boulevard East Reconfiguration 

Environmental Assessment, predictions were made about the employment population 
in Toronto and the surrounding region in the year 2031 in comparison to current data. 
Table 1 shows the data, which were converted to monetary values by assuming a unit 
dollar amount for each job. Which one of the following terms describes the analysis of 
the employment population: 
a.  Microeconomic analysis. 
b.  Macroeconomic analysis. 
c.  Life cycle analysis. 
d.  Net present value analysis. 

Area 
Toronto 
Greater Toronto and 
Hamilton Area 

Table 1 

Current 
Employment 
(Number of jobs) 
1.27 million 

2031 Employment 
Forecast 
(Number of jobs) 
1.83 million 

Growth 
44% 

3.26 million 

4.52 million 

39% 

22.  As part of the decision-making process for the Gardiner Expressway Rehabilitation 

Plan, a traffic delay analysis was carried out using the "QUEWZ" queuing methodology. 
“QUEWZ” determines the societal costs resulting from traffic delays and was used to 
analyze costs of the various rehabilitation options. “QUEWZ” was developed by the 
highly reputable Texas Transportation Institute in the United States and is considered 
the industry standard. It is used throughout North America, including by the Ontario 
Ministry of Transportation, which uses the "QUEWZ" methodology in the development 
of user costs on provincial highways. By using "QUEWZ", the City of Toronto is: 
a.  Relying on third party certification. 
b.  Demonstrating due diligence. 
c.  Providing quality assurance. 
d.  Establishing performance expectations. 

23.  Stormwater runoff refers to rain or snowmelt that flows over the ground, picking up 

pollutants and transporting them into the storm sewer system, which eventually flows 
into Lake Ontario. Impermeable surfaces like the Gardiner Expressway generate a lot 
of stormwater. To reduce the volume of stormwater the Gardiner Expressway 
generates, the City of Toronto is proposing to use permeable asphalt that allows water 
to gradually soak through the underlying road bed. This slows the velocity and volume 
of the runoff, reducing the amount of contaminated runoff that ends up in Lake Ontario. 
The City's proposal is an example of: 
a.  Pollution Control. 
b.  Pollution Prevention. 
c.  Water Recycling. 
d.  Wise Use of Resources. 

Page 8 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
24.  The contractor who has been hired to work on the first phase of the Expressway 

Rehabilitation submitted a bid that included the following costs: (1) hourly wages for 
workers; (2) unit price for asphalt of $50 per metre curb to curb; (3) monthly lease cost 
for asphalt paving equipment; and, (4) unit price for aggregate of $10 per tonne. Which 
of the following statements is true?  
a.  Costs (2) and (4) are variable costs and costs (1) and (3) are fixed costs. 
b.  Costs (1), (2) and (4) are variable costs and cost (3) is a fixed cost.  
c.  All costs are variable costs. 
d.  All costs are fixed costs. 

25.  Table 2 shows information for the Conventional and Accelerated approaches for 

rehabilitating the Expressway west of Jarvis Street. Which of the following statements 
is TRUE? 
a.  The Conventional Approach is preferred based on Net Present Value, and the 

Accelerated Approach is preferred based on Years of Traffic Impact. 

b.  The Conventional Approach is preferred over the Accelerated Approach based on 

User Cost. 

c.  The Conventional Approach will save $2.9 billion over 8 years. 
d.  The User Cost is not a reliable criteria for decision-making because it is an external 
cost and is not a direct cost related to the actual rehabilitation of the Expressway. 

Table 2 

Evaluation Criteria 
Net Present Value 
User Cost 
Years of Traffic Impact 

Conventional Approach 
$1,210 million 
$7.4 billion 
20 years 

Accelerated Approach 
$1,310 million 
$4.5 billion 
12 years 

Difference 
$100 million 
$2.9 billion 
8 years 

26.  As a design engineer, you have been asked to conduct a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 

to compare asphalt and concrete as road materials for rehabilitation of the "at grade" 
section of the Gardiner Expressway. You've collected the following information about 
asphalt and concrete: (1) the raw materials needed to produce them, (2) the 
manufacturing processes including energy requirements, (3) the chemical properties 
and potential human health impacts, and (4) the recycling and disposal options for each 
material once they have reached the end of their service life. To ensure your LCA is 
complete you should also include:  

a.  Environmental impacts associated with transporting the asphalt and concrete. 
b.  External benefits to road users. 
c.  Comparative information from other recent LCAs for the same road materials.  
d.  The terms of reference for the LCA. 

<<Questions continue on next page>> 

Page 9 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
27.  Figure 4 shows the stakeholder analysis chart that was produced for the Gardiner 
Expressway and Lakeshore Boulevard East Reconfiguration Environmental 
Assessment. Which are the most likely identities for stakeholders W, X, Y, and Z given 
their position in Figure 4?  
a.  W=City of Toronto; X=City Council; Y=Asphalt Suppliers; Z=Local Community 

Group 

b.  W=Ontario Ministry of Transportation; X=Local Community Group; Y=Newspaper 

Reporter; Z=City of Toronto 

c.  W=Ontario Ministry of Transportation; X=City of Toronto; Y=General Public; 

Z=Newspaper Reporter 

d.  W=Asphalt Suppliers; X=City of Toronto; Y=Ontario Ministry of Transportation; 

Z=General Public 

Figure 4. Stakeholder analysis chart for Question 27. 

28.  When assembling their engineering design team to proceed with the Improvement 

option the City used Bolton Leadership Style survey results. Given that all team 
members are equally technically competent, which of the following teams will have the 
greatest chance of success in the project? 
a.  To minimize the implementation delays the team will consist primarily of Drivers. 
b.  To reduce the chance of error on such a large infrastructure project the team will 

consist primarily of Analyticals. 

c.  To reduce conflict between the highly vocal resident organizations and the City, the 

team will consist primarily of Amiables. 

d.  To avoid over-specialization, the team will consist of at least one from each 

preferred leadership style (Driver, Expressive, Amiable, Analytical). 

29.  The City is concerned with the high number of fatal traffic accidents on the Gardiner 
Expressway. During the redesign phase Human Factor consultants identified an off 
ramp with a sharp curvature as a high accident location. Reducing vehicle speed on 
this off ramp will result in a significant reduction of traffic accidents. Which of the 
following strategies is most likely to achieve long term success? 
a.  Paint lines perpendicular to the flow of traffic with reducing separation distance. 
b.  Paint wavy lane boundary and separation lines parallel to the flow of traffic. 
c.  Increase the number of speed limit and curvature signs. 
d.  Assign a Police traffic officer to enforce a reduced speed limit. 

Page 10 of 17 

 
 
 
 
30.  A consulting engineering company is assisting the City to develop the Strategic Plan for 
the Rehabilitation of the Expressway and has suggested incorporating elements of 
industrial ecology. Which of the following statements is TRUE?  
a.  Industrial ecology applies to closed systems, so it cannot be applied to the 

Expressway. 

b.  Industrial ecology is being used in Kalundborg, Denmark, but would not be as 

effective in Toronto. 

c.  Industrial ecology is based on using a minimum of energy, least toxic materials, and 
creating other useful products at the end of a product's service life, so could be 
applied to the Expressway. 

d.  Industrial ecology seeks to optimize the flow of resources including along 

transportation routes, so could be applied to the Expressway. 

31.  As the City's design engineer working in the Engineering & Construction Services 
department, you are responsible for evaluating construction contract bids and 
recommending contract awards to the Public Works Committee. Your cousin, who is 
also your roommate, has just taken a job as a site supervisor for one of the construction 
companies that has submitted a $54 million bid for Phase 1 of the Gardiner 
Expressway rehabilitation. You have told your boss that your cousin works for the 
construction company, is your roommate, and you ask your boss to excuse you from 
evaluating the bids. Your boss agrees. Which situation have you avoided?  
a.  Allegations of Negligence. 
b.  Being identified as a Whistle-blower. 
c.  Finding of Incompetence. 
d.  Conflict of Interest. 

End of questions pertaining to Case Study #1: F.G. Gardiner Expressway. 

Question 32 is based on Case Study #2 “Pesticide Removal for Fruit and Vegetables,” 
located in the Appendix. 

32.  For the case study, which of the following is a Secondary Function? 

a.  Indicate when cleansing is completed. 
b.  Does not exceed 45 euros. 
c.  Maintains nutritional value of the vegetable/fruit. 
d.  Qualifies for patentability. 

Page 11 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 2:  

Long Answer Question (40%) 

INSTRUCTIONS: This section requires 4 written answers. Use an exam booklet and write in 
your name, student number, course, and date of examination on the booklet’s cover page. 
You may use as many pages as you need for your preliminary work, but the final answers 
must be no more than four (4) pages single-spaced or eight (8) pages double-spaced. 
Clearly indicate the final copy to be graded by writing “Final Copy” at the start of it. Use full 
sentences and paragraphs. 

This section of the exam evaluates your ability to 

•  Communicate in clear, concise, well-organized sentences and paragraphs with minimal 

error. 

•  Structure a logical argument, making clear claims and supporting them with the evidence 

currently available to you. 

•  Recognize the kinds of information you would need, moving forward, to validate and 

better support your claims. Generate specific questions to help you find that information. 

•  Read, understand, and analyse engineering-related material under time pressure. 

33.  Using techniques taught in the lecture on revision, revise the following two sentences to 

make them more concise while retaining their key messages. [5 marks] 

a. It is widely known that people who ride bicycles on the campus of the University of 
Toronto have become complainers in regards to the lack of bike lanes.  

b. Due to the fact that the computer system crashed, an announcement will be made 
by the instructor of the course that the results of the exam may be a little bit delayed. 

Questions 34 and 35 are based on Case Study #2 “Pesticide Removal for Fruit and 
Vegetables,” located in the Appendix. 

Read the client statement for Case Study #2. Then, drawing logically on it and your own 
knowledge, quickly generate a point form list of the KEY objectives and constraints for the 
pesticide project. Order the objectives from most important to least important, drawing 
logically again on information in the client statement and your own knowledge.  

[Notes: No metrics are required. Also, while the list itself will not be marked, it forms the 
basis for your answers to the questions that follow.] 

Using full sentences and well-developed paragraphs, answer the following questions: 

34.  For your top three objectives explain and justify why you considered each a key 

objective and why you ranked them in that particular order. If you think another reader 
might disagree with you, state what you think their counter argument might be and why 
you would still stay with your current choices. [10 marks] 

Page 12 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35.  Describe, as specifically as possible, the key research questions you would want to 
answer in order to check the validity of your claims and to develop the three top 
objectives further. (Don’t worry about whether the questions are open or closed.) Also 
discuss what kind(s) of information might change your mind about your objectives or 
objective rankings, if you uncovered such information. [5 marks] 

End of questions pertaining to Case Study #2 “Pesticide Removal for Fruit and 
Vegetables,” located in the appendix of this exam. 

Question 36 pertains to Case Study #3 “Solid-waste Management in Humanitarian 
Response,” located in the appendix of this exam. 

36.  Engineers can’t always rely solely on the client to scope engineering problems. Often, 
as with your vaccine project, an engineer must do it. After reading Case Study #3, 
consider how you would scope the solid-waste problem as a member of an engineering 
design team. (Tip: Think and write notes before you start writing your formal response!) 
Using full sentences and paragraphs, construct a well-written mini-analysis that 
addresses the following: First, what makes scoping this particular problem challenging 
(be specific)? Second, describe and explain some different ways you might approach 
scoping it. Discuss the specific challenges or trade-offs involved in scoping it each way. 
Third, choose a scoping approach and justify why you picked it as the best method 
under the circumstances. [10 marks] 

<<There are no more questions past this point>> 

Page 13 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
<<This page intentionally left blank>> 

Page 14 of 17 

 
 
Appendix A: Case Studies 
You may remove this appendix. There are no questions in this Appendix 

Case Study #1: F.G. Gardiner Expressway  

The City of Toronto owns and operates the F.G. Gardiner Expressway, a major arterial 
roadway that runs parallel to the Lake Ontario shoreline in the downtown core. The 
Expressway, which is shown in Figure 1, extends for 18 kilometres. From Highway 427 in the 
west, the Expressway runs for 11 kilometres at grade and then for 7 kilometres that are 
elevated, ending at the Don Valley Parkway in the east. For most of its length, the 
Expressway is six lanes wide and the posted speed limit is 90 km/hour.  

Source: http://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2014/pw/bgrd/backgroundfile-67051.pdf 

The Expressway was constructed over an 11-year period from 1955 to 1966, and is 
approaching the end of its original design life. The effects of weathering, salt, and increasing 
traffic loads have had an impact on the Expressway, with the result that ongoing 
maintenance and repair requirements and costs have increased significantly. 

The City of Toronto is currently undertaking two initiatives related to the Expressway: 

(1) Strategic Plan for the Rehabilitation of the Expressway - which will help the City decide 
the priority of various repairs to the Expressway. 

(2) Gardiner Expressway and Lake Shore Boulevard East Reconfiguration Environmental 
Assessment - to determine what to do with the elevated portion of the Expressway between 
Jarvis Street and the Don Valley Parkway. 

Page 15 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case Study #2: “Pesticide Removal for Fruits and Vegetables” [1] 

Health-conscious consumers are worried about residual pesticides in their food, particularly 
in emerging markets. Currently, the most common consumer solution for removing residual 
pesticides from fresh fruit and vegetables is to hand wash or soak the produce, but the 
results are neither uniform nor sufficient. The client seeks a solution (either technology or 
products) that meets the following key success criteria: “delivers pesticide removal benefit at 
low cost for home use; and…two times more efficient than ordinary hand washing 
methods.”[1] 

“Additional technical criteria: 
•  Safe to both user and environment (consumers at home) 
•  No damage to vegetable/fruit appearance, nor to nutrition value 
•  Cost price of end product should not exceed 45 euros 

o  The end product(s) has to be compact (for ease-of-use and storage) 
o  Not exceed around 35 L, preferably smaller 

•  Capacity to treat 500 grams leafy vegetables (e.g., lettuce or Chinese greens) per wash 
•  Preferably does not occupy tap during washing cycle 
•  Total cycle-time: around 25 minutes 
•  Can remove dirt/pesticides on fruit/vegetables in one cycle”[1] 

“Additional commercialization criteria: 
•  Proven technical feasibility (ideally in terms of prototypes, test data, etc.) no later than the 

second quarter of 2014 

•  Theoretical proof/data that solution is able to meet the required removal performance (at 

least 2x better than current typical consumer practices) 

•  Can provide a lasting competitive advantage, e.g., by IP [intellectual property rights], or 

exclusive purchase 

•  Cost price of the end product should not exceed 45 euros” [1] 

“Additional information: 
•  EC (emulsifiable concentrate) is one of the pesticide formulations that is difficult to 

remove. Leafy vegetables are the greatest concern of the consumer; it has to be possible 
to treat those with the proposed solution. 

•  The use of additives in the solution is only acceptable for those additives that are known 

to be edible and non-harmful. 

•  Solutions that do not require user interference in the process are most preferred. 
•  Visual proof that dirt or pesticide removal actually takes place is a strong wish.” [1] 

“The client is NOT looking for: 
•  Highly complex and expensive solutions 
•  Chemical solutions (except materials that are common in consumer kitchens and seen as 

edible/non-chemical, like salt or vinegar) 

•  Solutions that potentially cause irritation for the consumer to e.g., nose, skin, eyes, and 

others. Solutions that damage the fruit/vegetables or have negative effects on its 
nutritional value.” [1] 

Page 16 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Case Study #3: “Solid-Waste Management in Humanitarian Response” [2] 

 “Natural and [human]-made disasters like earthquakes and wars cause displacement of 
people from their homes to formal and informal camps. Relief efforts are usually centered 
around these locations. Even though these people have very little, they still produce a good 
amount of solid waste such as trash, garbage and even packing from the relief effort itself. If 
these wastes are not managed properly (collected, transported and disposed) it creates 
[many] health and environmental issues in time. We are searching for the most economical 
process of [quickly] managing solid wastes without worsening the already poor living 
conditions in these areas or causing harm to individuals or the environment.” [2] 

References 

[1] J. Tzeng, “Pesticide removal for fruits and vegetables,” NineSigma, Available: 
https://ninesights.ninesigma.com/, Accessed on: Nov. 21, 2014. 
[2] Humanitarian Innovation Fund, “Solid-waste management in humanitarian response,” 
InnoCentive.com, Available: https://www.innocentive.com/ar/ challenge/9933337, Accessed 
on: Nov. 21, 2014. 

Page 17 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
