University of Toronto 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
APS111 & APS113 Engineering Strategies and Practice 
Course Coordinator: Jason Bazylak 
Communication Coordinator: Peter Weiss 
Module A Coordinator: Susan McCahan 
Midterm Examination 
October 27, 2016 

This  is  a  70  minute  midterm  with  39  questions  and  16  pages.  It  is  a  multiple  choice 
midterm and is closed book. No aids are permitted. Read each question thoroughly and 
provide the answer on the answer sheet. Be sure to fill out the answer sheet clearly with 
no  overlaps.  Fill  out  the  answer  sheet  using  a  pencil.  Erase  any  errors  completely. 
Provide only 1 answer per question and each correct answer is worth 1 mark. There is 
no deduction for wrong answers. Select the answer that best satisfies the question. You 
are not required to hand in the exam question booklet. You may tear off the appendix to 
ease the answering of questions. 

1.  When working on the description of the service environment, you are in: 

a.  The concept space 
b.  The solution space 
c.  The problem space  
d.  The implementation space 

2.  The phases of a design project (defining the problem, conceptual design, etc) are: 

a.  The same for every project both in phase type and duration. 
b.  Generally the same for every project, but often differ in duration. 
c.  Different in every project, but the duration of each phase is usually the same. 
d.  Mostly unnecessary; most projects do not have these phases. 

3.  A design project initiated by a company that employs its own engineers to work on 

the design is called: 
a.  An in-house project 
b.  An internal project 
c.  A consulting project 
d.  A contracted project 

4.  A public bidding system with clear, firm deadlines is used to: 

a.  Penalize companies that take too long preparing a proposal. 
b.  Ensure that the project can start on time. 
c.  Minimize the number of proposals so it is easier to pick a contractor. 
d.  Create a fair process so every company bidding has an equal opportunity. 

1 of 16 

 
 
5.  “A set of measurable characteristics that a design solution needs to fulfill to address 

a design problem” describes: 
a.  An Implementation Plan 
b.  A Request for Proposals (RFP) 
c.  A Conceptual Design Specification (CDS) 
d.  Detailed Requirements  

6.  The three most common sources for constraints in a design problem are: 

a.  Government, the client, and stakeholder interests. 
b.  Government, the design brief, and codes. 
c.  The client, regulations, and users. 
d.  The design brief, users and operators, and regulations. 

7.  Suppose your design team is tasked with designing a new, portable device to tell 
time (e.g. something like a wrist watch). If you apply the black box method to this 
design problem, which of the following would be outputs: 
a.  A strap to hold the device to the user’s wrist, and the correct time of day. 
b.  The user, and the correct time of day. 
c.  Initial time setting accurate for the user’s location (i.e. time zone), and the user. 
d.  A visual indication of the time (e.g. written numbers), and a strap to hold the 

device to the user’s wrist. 

8.  The field of human-centered design has evolved over the last few decades. Current 
trends in this field include increasingly taking into account in the design process: 
a.  The user’s emotional needs. 
b.  Environmental issues. 
c.  The user’s physical measurements, i.e. anthropometric data. 
d.  The stakeholder’s interests. 

9.  In moving from ideation to detailed design, the design team must discard a large 

number of potential designs. The basis for deciding which design ideas to keep, and 
which to discard, is which design ideas best: 
a.  Fit the top objective of the project. 
b.  Meet all of the constraints. 
c.  Fulfill the stakeholder interests. 
d.  Fit the requirements. 

10. Which of the following is TRUE for standards? 

a.  A standard never relies on, or references other standards. 
b.  All standards are written in SI units, which is a global requirement. 
c.  You must reference and use applicable standards in requirements. 
d.  Use of standards is voluntary, not mandatory. 

2 of 16 

 
11. The graphical decision matrix method is used to: 

a.  Eliminate ideas that do not meet the top objectives for the project. 
b.  Eliminate ideas that do not meet the constraints for the project. 
c.  Identify ideas that best meet the functional requirements for the project. 
d.  Identify ideas that best meet the stakeholder interests for the project. 

12. Support for a claim is considered both TRUE and Valid when:  

a.  The premises are true and link evidence to the claim in a way that stands up to 

reasonable analysis.  

b.  The evidence really exists and comes from a high quality, valid reference source.  
c.  The idea is truly valuable and people agree with it, without even having to see 

evidence – for example, common knowledge. 

d.  The premises are true and the support for the claim comes from a person 

believed to be a valid expert. 

13. What are the three necessary parts for a complete claim? 

a.  Subject, Verb and Predicate 
b.  Fact, Opinion and Claim 
c.  Statement, Explanation and Evidence  
d.  Grammar, Spelling and Syntax 

14. Critical thinking means: 

a.  Having opinions based only on your own experience and values. 
b.  Having ideas that are entirely free from bias and value-laden language. 
c.  Having unique ideas that you can convince others to accept as valid. 
d.  Having the ability to criticize other people’s ideas from your own perspective. 

15. Which of the following statements is TRUE? 

a.  Because bias is the same as prejudice, you must work to get rid of all bias in 

yourself. 

b.  No one is entirely free of bias since everyone has a frame of reference. 
c.  Because of bias, all engineering decisions must inevitably be subjective. 
d.  To have good judgement, you must never make a decision that agrees with your 

bias. 

16. Engineers are constrained by the communication practices of science. This means 

that: 
a.  They only write lab reports. 
b.  Never use any form of argument. 
c.  They use arguments based on evidence and logic. 
d.  They must use the appropriate jargon, no matter the audience. 

3 of 16 

 
17. Plain language is language in which: 

a.  One thing is compared with another using the words “like” or “as” – for example, 

“the pepper was as hot as fire.” 

b.  The explicit meaning has far more effect than the implied meaning – for example, 
“the pepper was hot because it contained a high level of an ingredient known as 
capsaicin.” 

c.  The words are user-friendly, enabling the reader to easily see what is meant – for 

example, “the car burned up the road.” 

d.  What is said is plain and has no extra description in the form of adjectives or 

adverbs – for example, “a pepper.” 

18. Why are tables typically used in engineering? 

a.  To organize information. 
b.  To communicate relationships between parts of a system. 
c.  To give the reader a visual understanding of the data. 
d.  To enhance the visual appeal of a document. 

19. In preparing Project Requirements, an engineer asks and answers a series of 

questions, including: 
a.  What is the best solution for the problem at hand? 
b.  Do my alternatives give value to the client, by representing unique trade-offs? 
c.  What do I know and what do I not know about the problem at hand?  
d.  What are the final costs, who will pay them and when? 

Questions 20 to 22 pertain to the Team situation described in the following paragraph 

Fiona, Garrett and Hattie are working on a design team together. They have not worked 
together before on a project. 

20. After talking for a while, they decide that it would be useful to develop a set of team 
beliefs. These include the shared goals of the project, and a preliminary timeline for 
completing some of the major deliverables for the project. This phase of teaming is 
called: 
a.  Forming 
b.  Storming 
c.  Norming 
d.  Performing 

4 of 16 

 
21. In discussing how they will work together, the team decides that they will use voting 

to make decisions. What else should they add to this decision to make voting a more 
effective means of decision making?  
a.  They should add a rule that all votes should be unanimous because with only 

three people on the team it would be better if everyone agreed on every decision. 

b.  They should add a rule that all votes should be recorded in their engineering 

notebooks. This will ensure that they have an accurate record of every decision 
and who voted for what. 

c.  They should add a rule that everyone should have a chance to express their 

opinion before the vote. This will ensure that they have adequately discussed the 
options before voting. 

d.  They should add a rule that everyone must vote on every decision. Otherwise 

they could have a tie which would stop them from moving forward on the project. 

22. Fiona, Garett and Hattie found that developing their team beliefs was relatively easy. 
They all agreed on the purpose and goals of the project. They also all seem to have 
a similar commitment to completing the project successfully. This means that: 
a.  It is unlikely that conflicts or disagreements will arise during the course of the 

project because the team shares the same beliefs. 

b.  It is unlikely that conflicts and disagreements will arise because the team is so 

small – only three people. 

c.  It is likely that conflicts and disagreements will arise during the project, and they 

can use their shared beliefs to address these issues. 

d.  It is likely the conflicts and disagreements will arise, so shared beliefs are not 

very helpful. 

Questions 23 to 39 pertain to the Case Study -  Chewing Gum Anti-Theft Solution 
located in the appendix of this booklet. 

23. The functional basis for this case study can best be described as 

a.  Maintaining mass and controlling transport of mass 
b.  Combining mass and optimizing transformation of energy 
c.  Separating information and controlling mass location 
d.  Sensing information and preventing energy storage 

24. One of the most important objectives in this design problem is; 
a.  Should require no modification to packaging processes. 
b.  Must be food safe. 
c.  Should utilize AM or RFID tags which are used in many other similar products. 
d.  Should not negatively impact product or package shelf life. 

5 of 16 

 
 
25. One of the other objectives in this problem is “should be very low cost”. Given that a 
typical package of chewing gum costs about $1.00, what would be an appropriate 
objective goal for this requirement? 
a.  More than $1.00 per package of gum that the system protects. 
b.  More than 10 cents per package of gum that the system protects. 
c.  Less than $1.00 per package of gum that the system protects. 
d.  Less than 10 cents per package of gum that the system protects. 

26. For the objective “should be very low cost”, which of the following would be an 

appropriate metric? 
a.  Weigh the package of gum before and after the solution has been applied. 
b.  Calculate the cost of a package of gum before and after the solution has been 

applied. 

c.  Calculate the cost of manufacturing AM or RFID tags and putting them into the 

packaging. 

d.  Measure the number of chewing gum thefts before and after the solution has 

been applied. 

27. If the primary market for the system is North America, then the service environment 

description for this design should include 
a.  Average wind speed, and average outdoor temperature. 
b.  Typical lighting conditions in a store, and information about shelving systems 

used in stores. 

c.  The typical floor plan of a store, and information about the building materials 

used in the store construction. 

d.  Information about the habits of squirrels, birds and other animals that are 

common in the North American environment. 

28. The client for this design is Mondelez, the manufacturer of the chewing gum product. 
Which of the following row would be the best choice for expressing a stakeholder 
and their interest in your Project Requirements document? 

Stakeholder 

a.  The design team 

b.  Users 

Interest 

economic and ethical interest 

economic and social interest 

c.  environmental groups, such as the Sierra Club 

legal and economic interest 

d.  Law enforcement agencies 

legal and social interest 

6 of 16 

 
 
 
29. Which of the following would be the best choice for a benchmarking activity for this 

design problem? 
a.  Observing the current manufacturing process for the chewing gum by visiting the 

gum factory. 

b.  Watching video tape surveillance from stores that carry consumer products. 
c.  Observing a user buying a package of gum and noting the steps they follow. 
d.  Analyzing the anti-theft strategies used in other products such as shampoo. 

30. Which of the following is an example of task analysis for this design problem? 

a.  Observing the current manufacturing process for the chewing gum by visiting the 

gum factory. 

b.  Watching video tape surveillance from stores that carry consumer products. 
c.  Observing a user buying a package of gum and noting the steps they follow. 
d.  Analyzing the anti-theft strategies used in other products such as shampoo. 

31. One of the requirements identified for this product is “must not increase the 

environmental impact relative to the existing product”. This means that a solution 
with more environmental impact than the current product: 
a.  Would be fine to propose. 
b.  Is not preferred, but may be acceptable given other considerations. 
c.  Is acceptable if it meets government regulations for environmental impact. 
d.  Is not acceptable. 

32. Suppose your design team uses decomposition to generate solution ideas for this 

design problem. One activity that would be part of this process would be: 
a.  Brainstorming solution ideas for that would meet the requirements. 
b.  Combining ideas using a morphological chart. 
c.  Brainstorming ideas for the use of RFID tags in the product packaging. 
d.  Looking at biological systems for inspiration. 

33. Your team uses a pairwise comparison to prioritize the objectives and finds that one 
of the objectives, “allows the production machinery to run at current speeds”, gets a 
score of zero. This means that the team should 
a.  Discard this objective and not use it for comparing alternatives later. 
b.  Set this objective aside for now and only use it later if it is needed. 
c.  Continue to use the objective in the alternative selection process. 
d.  Prioritize this objective because it becomes the most important consideration in 

selecting an alternative. 

7 of 16 

 
34. Suppose your design team comes up with two solutions: 

•  A low cost way to add a physical lock, so the gum cannot be accessed 

without a code. 

•  A shelving system that allows the customer to only take one item at a time, 

instead of quickly dumping a whole shelf of goods into a bag. 

In developing a solution to propose, the team puts these ideas together and proposes a 
shelf that has a code lock on it and only dispenses one item at a time. The customer 
buys a code, and then goes and gets their gum. This is an example of using: 

a.  Brainstorming 
b.  Decomposition 
c.  SCAMPER 
d.  Design by analogy 

35. The users and operators for this design do NOT include 
a.  People shopping at stores that carry chewing gum. 
b.  People buying chewing gum. 
c.  Store clerks who put products onto store shelves. 
d.  Cashiers at stores that carry the chewing gum. 

A team working on the Mondelez project has written the following Problem Statement: 

Mondelez Corporation has tasked our design team with finding a solution 
to the problem of chewing gum theft in newer, larger, modern stores that 
are the main distribution channels for their famous product, Trident gum. 
These stores are limiting shelf space and restricting display or thinking of 
encasing  the  product  in  acrylic  boxes  so  that  people  cannot  get  to  it 
easily  enough  to  steal  it.  Therefore,  the  stores  have  a  gap  in  display 
spaces that are resistant to theft but enable legitimate shoppers to easily 
select the product they want and purchase it. A solution must be low-cost 
and food safe. 

36. Which of the following statements demonstrates the communication values of this 

course? 
a.  This is a well written Problem Statement which has no grammatical errors. 
b.  This Problem Statement does a poor job because it does not add any new 

information to the Client Statement. 

c.  This Problem Statement does a good job of confirming the information in the 

Client Statement. 

d.  This Problem Statement does a poor job of predicting what the solution could be. 

8 of 16 

 
37. The Mondelez International Inc. fact sheet states “Our dream is to create delicious 

moments of joy in everything that we do.” This statement is an example of: 
a.  Evidence for the claim that Mondelez’s interest is creating joy. 
b.  A constraint from the client that the design shall be joyful. 
c.  Figurative language used for marketing. 
d.  A description of the “gap” in the current snacks market. 

38. A design team is referencing the Mondelez fact sheet. The correct way to format the 

reference as an online source, according to the IEEE standard, is: 
a.  No author. (No date) 2016 Fact Sheet. [PDF] Available: 

http://www.mondelezinternational.com/~/media/mondelezcorporate/Uploads/dow
nloads/mondelez_intl_fact_sheet.pdf 
b.  “2016 Fact Sheet.” Mondelez Corporation, 

http://www.mondelezinternational.com/~/media/mondelezcorporate/Uploads/dow
nloads/mondelez_intl_fact_sheet.pdf. Accessed 17 Oct. 2016. 

c.  Fact sheet. 

http://www.mondelezinternational.com/~/media/mondelezcorporate/Uploads/dow
nloads/mondelez_intl_fact_sheet.pdf  

d.  Mondelēz. (2016) Mondelēz International Corporate Factsheet 2016 Fact Sheet. 

[Online] Available: 
http://www.mondelezinternational.com/~/media/mondelezcorporate/Uploads/dow
nloads/mondelez_intl_fact_sheet.pdf  

39. For this project, use of the Wikipedia article on chewing gum is 

a.  Strictly forbidden – use of Wikipedia is considered an academic misconduct at 

university.  

b.  A good place to start – but you should go on to more detailed and specific 

sources. 

c.  Very useful because you need at least three references for every sentence in the 

assignment.  

d.  A poor place to start since the focus of the design is the packaging rather than 

the gum itself. 

End of questions that pertain to the Case Study – Chewing Gum Anti-Theft 
Solution located in the appendix of this booklet. 

There are no questions beyond this point 

9 of 16 

 
 
 
 
This page is intentionally blank

10 of 16 

 
Appendix A: Case Study – Chewing Gum Anti-Theft Solution1 

There are no questions in this appendix. You may detach this appendix for ease of 
answering the questions that pertain to the Case Study. 

Client: Mondelēz International 
Their company manifesto can be found at: 
http://www.mondelezinternational.com/about-us/our-dream-belief-and-values 
Mondelēz brands include Oreos, Cadbury, Triscuits, Toblerone, and others 
See the posted corporate fact sheet for more information 

Description 
The client is looking for a low cost solution to reduce, or eliminate, the theft of chewing 
gum from stores. The solution must allow the gum to be displayed prominently on 
existing shelving units and give the retailer confidence that the product will not be 
stolen. 

Background 
Trident gum currently holds a leadership position many global markets. Consumer 
research shows it is considered one of the most beloved brands.  

The newer, larger, modern stores that have developed are one of the main distribution 
channels for Trident, but theft has become a problem. As a result, some of the key 
accounts are limiting shelf space and restricting display to isolated locations. This 
results in lost sales. 

Other products with a similar issue, such as batteries, sunscreen, shampoo and even 
nursing products. These products have moved to encasing the product in acrylic boxes 
or adding acousto-magnetic or radio frequency tags to the products.   

Mondelez is looking for a low cost solution to reduce or eliminate the theft of chewing 
gum from stores. The solution must allow the gum to be displayed prominently and give 
the retailer confidence that the product will not be stolen.  

Key Success Criteria 
The proposed technology should: 

•  Not impact product or package quality, safety or functionality 
•  Be very low cost 
•  Should not negatively impact product or package shelf life 
•  Must be food safe 
•  Enable production machinery that manufactures the gum and packaging to run at 

current speeds  

1 Adapted from NineSigma Request Number N645136 

11 of 16 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
                                                           
 
 
•  Should require minimum modification to packaging processes 
•  Must not increase the environmental impact relative to the existing product 
• 

If an AM or RF solution, it must work with existing AM or RF control systems for 
alarm and deactivation 

Possible Approaches 
Possible approaches include, but are not limited to: 

•  Modifications to packaging materials that reduce theft 
•  Low cost AM or RF packaging inclusions 
•  New technologies compatible with existing systems 

12 of 16 

 
Appendix B – Mondelēz Fact Sheet 

13 of 16 

 
 
14 of 16 

 
 
 
15 of 16 

 
 
 
16 of 16 

 
 
