Engineering Strategies and Practice 

Syllabus 
Engineering Strategies and Practice (ESP) is a foundational design course sequence that uses the 
engineering design process as a context for developing skills essential to the practice of 
engineering:  

This two-course sequence – ESP I in the fall term and ESP II in the winter term - will introduce 

Figure 1: ESP Skills 

you to these five skills. By designing a solution to a problem for a client you will learn to 
problem solve with creativity, methodology and credibility. In conducting background research 
for your project you will practice independent learning skills. You will be required to take into 
account factors outside of the technical such as environmental, societal, ethical, and human 
factors and in doing so you will develop a systems thinking approach in your work. In reporting 
your solution you will make use of effective written, oral, and graphical professional 
communication. Finally you will achieve all of this while working efficiently in a team. 

In summary the primary course objective is to encourage you to start synthesizing and 
integrating your knowledge to make you a better engineer. 

ESP I 

ESP I introduces the design process through a common design project given to all teams. In your 
assigned team you will grapple with the challenges of an engineering design problem while 
working efficiently in a team. Writing and reading, as engineering activities, are introduced. You 
will also learn how to identify and take into account factors such as economics, environment, 
society, and human factors, as frontline design considerations. In the second half of the course, 
you will participate in a seminar. In small groups you will discuss a topic unique to your seminar 
that in addition to engineering content requires broader considerations when making a 
professional recommendation. You will be assigned readings on the topic and required to 
express your opinion through an oral presentation.  

1 

 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

ESP II 

Now that you have experience with the engineering design process you will be assigned your 
own unique design project completed with a real client. You will learn the basics of project 
management, how to approach a complex problem and break it down into solvable parts, and 
how to acquire and use information in the design process. Working in a team with a real client, 
you will go through a complete design process to develop an initial workable solution to meet a 
client’s need. The end result will be a written final design specification, an oral presentation, 
and for teams that excel a prototype, proof-of-concept model, or simulation.  

Lectures 

Tuesday 9:10 – 10:00 am, Convocation Hall 

Thursday 9:10 – 10:00 am, Convocation Hall 

Friday 9:10 – 10:00 am, Convocation Hall  

Attendance at lectures is mandatory. The first lecture is on Tuesday, January 6, 2015 in 
Convocation Hall. 

Tutorials 

Attendance at tutorials is mandatory. Check ROSI for the day, time and location of your tutorial. 
There is no tutorial in Week 1 (January 5-9), however there is a tutorial agenda that lists things 
you  are  expected  to  have  completed  before  your  Week  2  tutorial.  Tutorials  start  in  Week  2 
(January  12-16).  On  Blackboard,  check  the  course  schedule  for  details  about  tutorial  activities 
and  the  tutorial  agendas  for  specific  expected  deliverable  for  each  tutorial.  Consult  with  your 
ROSI schedule to see which one of the following tutorial sections you are to attend: 

T01 – T06 
T07 – T12 
T13 – T18 
T19 – T24 
T25 – T30 
APS113 T01 

Monday 
Tuesday 
Wednesday 
Thursday 
Friday 
Friday 

4:10 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
4:10 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
4:10 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
4:10 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
4:10 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
2:10 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 

In addition to this weekly tutorial you are encouraged to arrange a weekly meeting with your 
team  to  discuss  project  progress,  conduct  team  business,  to  make  project  decisions,  and  to 
work  on  team  written  documents.  Regular  meetings  with  your  Communications  Instructor 
would also be beneficial.  

Textbook 

In ESP II we use the same e-textbook that was used in ESP I (APS111 and APS113 Fall 2014). If 
you already purchased it for ESP I, then you do not need to purchase any other book. You are 
responsible  for  readings  assigned  from  the  e-book  and  any  additional  readings  posted  on 
2 

 
 
 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

Blackboard. Content from these readings will be evaluated even if the material was not covered 
directly in lecture. It is important to keep up with the readings. Consult the course schedule for 
the assigned reading list. 

•  Designing  Engineers:  An  Introductory  Textbook  (S.  McCahan,  P.  Anderson,  M. 

Kortschot, P. Weiss, and K.Woodhouse ) 
This textbook is a pre-publication version of a design textbook being written by members 
of  the  ESP  teaching  team  and  other  experts  in  the  field.  This  textbook  will  not  be 
available in hard copy and instead an e-book version will be available for purchase for a 
nominal fee.  Purchasing  the  textbook  online  requires  a  credit  card.  If  you  do  not  have 
access  to  a  credit  card  then  you  can  purchase  an  a  redemption  code  from  the  U  of  T 
Bookstore. The e-book version is downloadable to a single computer (PC or MAC). After 
the initial download the book is available offline. The book file is only viewable through 
the VitalSource viewing software, which can be downloaded from this link:  

http://www.vitalsource.com/index/wiley 

This  viewing  software  allows  for  highlighting  text  and  notations.  If  you  buy  a  new 
computer, you can contact VitalSource Technical Support who can help you move the e-
book to your new computer. Copy protection restricts you to printing 10 pages at a time 
or copying up to two pages at a time. Those who have purchased the e-book will also be 
able to access it via a browser from any computer with internet access. Finally there are 
free apps for both iOS and Android that allow mobile access to purchased books.  

To purchase the e-book online, please go to this direct link for the correct textbook:  

http://store.vitalsource.com/show/9781118843956 

If you go to the general Vital Source website and search for the e-book instead of using 
the  direct  link  above,  you  might  encounter  older  versions  of  the  e-book  that  are 
different  and  incomplete.  The  current  correct  version  of  the  e-book  is:    Designing 
Engineers: An Introductory E-Text by McCahan for $39.95 US E-ISBN: 9781118843956 

If you had purchased a redemption code from the U of T Bookstore, please note that you 
will need to first install the VitalSource Bookshelf software.  After you have successfully 
installed the software, do the following to redeem and download the textbook: 

1.  Launch the VitalSource Bookshelf. 
2.  Under the “Help” menu (at top), select “activate new content.” 
3.  Login (or register if this is your first time) 
4.  Enter your redemption code. 

3 

 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

5.  Click “Redeem.” 
6.  Go to “All Titles. Select the title you just redeemed. 
7.  Click “Download” 

Once downloaded, your Wiley E-Text will appear in the VitalSource Bookshelf on your 
computer.  You can access your digital text anytime since an internet connection is not 
required. 

Note:  If you have purchased a redemption code from the Bookstore, it takes 24 hours 
from the time of purchase for the code to be activated.  You must wait for the 24 hours 
to pass before you can redeem your code on VitalSource. 

Special Supplies 

Besides  your  textbooks  and  standard  stationary  there  are  some  special  supplies  required  for 
ESP. These are described below. 

Engineering Notebook 

You  must  document  your  progress  on  your  project.  Standard  practice  in  industry  is  to  use  a 
hardcover notebook. It is recommended you use a standard bound lab notebook such as a black 
or blue physics or chemistry lab book. The size, color, and/or page format (ruled or quad) does 
not  matter.  A  loose-leaf  binder  or  spiral  bound  notebook  is  not  acceptable.  An  example  of  a 
notebook is available here: http://bit.ly/engnotebook  

If  you  always  have  your  laptop  /  tablet  with  you,  you  may  prefer  to  use  a  digital  solution  for 
your  engineering  documentation.  If  you  opt  for  this  you  should  have  some  organizational 
structure  such  as  OneNote,  Evernote,  Google  Docs,  etc.  You  should  also  have  a  means  of 
capturing sketches for inclusion in your documentation. This could be a stylus on a tablet or a 
cell phone camera with high enough resolution.  
You  may  reuse  your  engineering  notebook  from  APS111  if  it  has  sufficient  pages  left.  Clearly 
indicate in the book where APS111 ends and APS112 begins.  

Google Account 

Assignments  in  this  course  are  required  to  be  written  using  Google  Docs  (Google  Drive).  This 
requires you to have a Google account. A Google account is different from a Gmail account. If 
you already have a Google account using your Gmail address, please set your mail.utoronto.ca 
address as your alternate email address in your Google account, or sign up for another Google 
account with your mail.utoronto.ca address. If you don’t have a Google account, sign up free of 
charge using the  link  below.  (Click  on  “I  prefer to  use  my  current email address”  to  set up  an 
account using your mail.utoronto.ca address.) 

http://tinyurl.com/6s6vya 

4 

 
 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

Top Hat (TH) Account 

Your  Professional  Development  grade  requires  you  to  answer  in-lecture  course  concept 
questions using the TH system. You must be registered with Top Hat (http://www.tophat.com) 
to earn these marks. The registration fee has already been paid for you by the Faculty. Course 
instructors  will  ask  course  concept  questions  in  lecture  to  gauge  students’  understanding  of 
course material. As well, students may ask instructors questions via TH in lecture. See the Top 
Hat  Instructions  posted  on  Blackboard  for  more  information  on  registration.  See  the 
Professional Development grade section below for more details about the marking.  
Note:    You  must  enroll  in  the  ESP  II  Winter  2015  Top  Hat  class  to  receive  grades  in  Winter 
2015. Please use the Top Hat Instructions posted on Blackboard to enroll correctly. 

SMS Text-Capable Cell Phone 

To participate in the in lecture course concept questions via Top Hat you will need an SMS text-
capable cellular phone. Currently, Convocation Hall does not have WiFi access for you to 
connect to TH on your laptop. Regular SMS text costs will apply. You can expect to send 
approximately 60-180 text messages in total for ESP I and ESP II. If you do not have an SMS text-
capable cellular phone, you may contact the ESP Office for assistance. 

Marking 

The marks for ESP II are broken down as indicated in Table 1.  

Table 1 - ESP II mark breakdown 

Evaluation  

% of final mark 

Team Documents: 
Project Requirements & Project Management Plan 
Conceptual Design Specification 
Final Design Specification 

Presentations:  
Design Review Gateway in-tutorial presentation: 3%  
Final presentation: 20%  

Quizzes (2)  

Individual Assessments: 
Lessons Learned & Strategy 
Project Manager Report  

Professional Development  
(PD grade consists of lecture participation and safety training. 
Other PD activities are bonus. ) 

30% 

23% 

24% 

20% 

3% 

Total 

100% 

5 

 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

Project Manager Report 

This is an individual mark assigned by your Project Manager (PM). Your PM will be assessing the 
overall quality and quantity of your participation in the design project from his/her perspective, 
including  your  weekly  contributions  to  the  progress  of  the  project,  your  attendance  and 
participation at the weekly meeting with your PM, and your team dynamic skills. Your PM may 
use peer evaluations as one source of information in determining the above criteria. See the PM 
Report document for additional details. 

Quizzes  

There are two quizzes in ESP II. The first takes place roughly midterm, the second takes place at 
the end of the term. See the course schedule for specific date, time, and location. Quiz logistics 
will be posted in Blackboard closer to the evaluation date.    

Both  of  the  quizzes  are  Type  A  exams  as  defined  in  the  Faculty  Calendar.  This  means  that  no 
printed materials can be used as an aid during the tests with the exception of a translation-only 
paper dictionary. The quizzes are closed book and closed notes. No electronic dictionaries are 
permitted at the exams.  

Instead of writing a final exam in ESP II, you will be conducting your final oral presentations on 
your design project. 

Professional Development (PD) 

Professional behaviour is a series of habits that you must start developing immediately. You will 
not be able to “switch on” professionalism once you graduate. It is just as important for you to 
project  a  professional  image  in  your  lectures  and  tutorials  as  it  is  in  client  meetings  and 
interviews.  A  portion  of  your  course  grade  will  be  allocated  based  on  indicators  of  your 
professional behaviour.  

The greatest input into this grade is your ability to attend and follow along in ESP lectures. In 
most  lectures  the  instructor  will  ask  multiple  course  concept  questions  through  the  Top  Hat 
system. For each question, 0.5 mark will be for answering correctly and 0.5 for participating. At 
the end of the term, the total number of the Top Hat questions plus the point for the Health & 
Safety  Training  (posted  on  Blackboard)  will  be  the  total  possible  marks  for  Professional 
Development. 

NOTE:  To  answer  in  lecture  questions  you  must  be  physically  present.  Attempting  to  answer 
without being physically present is an academic offense.  

Throughout the term there will be opportunities to earn “bonus PD points.” These opportunities 
will be announced. Bonus points will be posted on Blackboard at the end of the term. The bonus 
points  will  be  added  to  your  PD  grade  on  our  spreadsheet  when  we  calculate  your  overall 
course grade at the end of term.  It is possible to exceed 100% for your PD grade if you amass 
enough PD bonus points.  

6 

 
 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

Your ability to collect PD marks will depend on registering for a TH account and having access to 
an SMS capable cell phone (see the Special Supplies section above and the Top Hat Instructions 
posted on Blackboard).  

Attribution Table 

For  all  team  assignments  an  attribution  table  must  be  completed  and  signed  by  all  team 
members.  The  attribution  table  must  be  reviewed  by  all  of  the  team  members  prior  to  the 
document debrief session to make sure that all members agree on the information given in the 
table. The information must be fair and accurate. 

If  the  table  indicates  a  substantial  discrepancy  in  contribution  (i.e.  a  large  difference  in  the 
contributions among the team members) then the marks assigned to individual team members 
may  be  reduced  to  reflect  this  discrepancy.  The  TA  will  give  an  overall  “team  mark”  on  the 
assignment. The TA will then use the attribution table, the document revision history, and the 
assignment debrief meeting to ascertain the contribution of each member to the development 
of the document. If the TA determines an imbalance in contribution, he or she will decide on a 
reduced  mark  for  the  under-contributing  team  member(s).  These  marks  are  simply  lost.  They 
are  NOT  redistributed  to  the  other  team  members.  This  is  because  one  of  the  learning 
objectives  of  these  team  assignments  is  to  mange  to  work  effectively  in  a  team.  Under-
contributing team members mean that the team has failed to achieve this learning objective. 

Course Communication Mechanisms 

It  is  important  that  you  keep  in  contact  with  the  ESP  Teaching  Team.  These  lines  of 
communication are maintained in a number of different ways: 

Blackboard  

This  site  can  be  accessed  through  the  U  of  T portal.  Go  to the  U  of  T  homepage  and  click  on 
“Portal.” You will need your UTOR ID and password to login. 

The site is where we will post class announcements and all course documents and where you 
can  access  your  term  marks  as  they  become  available.  This  is  the  primary  mode  of  course 
communication  outside  of  lecture  and  tutorial.  It  is  expected  that  you  will  check  Blackboard 
frequently for information. 

Public Course Website 

The public ESP website (www.esp.engineering.utoronto.ca) is for the general public, such as ESP 
II clients, and not students. All student information will be found on Blackboard as mentioned 
above. 

7 

 
 
 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

Email 

Do not email questions on course content, instead post the question on Piazza (see below). Only 
in exceptional cases will course content questions be answered via email. 

If you do send an email to a member of the teaching team consider it a professional email. This 
means  that  you  must  adhere  to  the  Professional  Email  Style  Requirements  posted  on 
Blackboard. Failure to do so may result in no response to your email.  

Do not put an automatic forward on your U of T email. We have had difficulty in the past with 
Hotmail and other providers filtering out U of T originated messages. If your email provider has 
this compatibility problem with the U of T system, you will miss important course information. A 
missed email will not be considered sufficient justification for the granting of petitions. Be sure 
you are getting all the course notices. 

Piazza 

We will be using Piazza for class discussion. The system is intended help you get answers to your 
questions as fast and efficiently as possible. The tool allows you to post your question to all your 
peers and members of the teaching team. We can then collaboratively answer your question. If 
you  are  not  satisfied  with  your  peers  answers  you  can  keep  the  question  unresolved  and  a 
member of the teaching team will either answer it themselves or endorse a student’s answer.  

If you prefer you can use the tool to send a question privately to the teaching team.  

You  are  strongly  encouraged  to  use  this  tool to  ask  your  questions  rather  than  email.  Only  in 
exceptional circumstances will a question be answered via email.  

You can enroll in our class Piazza page at: 
https://piazza.com/utoronto.ca/winter2015/aps112 

Cheating and Plagiarism 

This  course  has  both  team  and  individual  assignments.  Check  the  instruction  sheet  for  each 
assignment  to  identify  whether  it  is  an  individual  assignment  or  a  team  assignment.  When 
working  collaboratively  with  other  members  of  the  class,  as  with  all  professional 
communication, reports must bear all of the names of all the people who contributed to them, 
and acknowledge their contribution. It is considered plagiarism to submit a paper solely under 
your own name (i.e. take credit for it) if the content was written all or in part by someone else. 
While it is acceptable to re-use your own material in the iterative process within a given project, 
it  is  considered  plagiarism  to  re-use  your  own  material  for  another  project.  If  you  are  ever  in 
doubt whether something constitutes plagiarism ask a member of the teaching team. 

When submitting assignments that are to be written individually, you must never copy even a 
portion of another student’s paper, or let another student copy yours. Failure to adhere to this 

8 

 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

rule is considered to be plagiarism – by both parties involved. Do not allow another student to 
borrow  a  draft  of  your assignment  and do  not  leave  a  copy  of  your  assignment  where  others 
may  use  it.  The  University  takes  cheating  of  any  kind  very  seriously.  Possible  penalties  for 
cheating  include  a  negative  mark  on  an  assignment,  zero  in  the  course,  annotations  on  your 
transcript, or even expulsion from the University. It is simply not a risk worth taking, no matter 
how desperate you may feel. It is far better to submit a substandard assignment than take the 
chance  of  incurring  the  kinds  of  academic  penalties  that  the  University  will  impose.  For  more 
information  on  the  definition  of  academic  and  non-academic  offences,  procedures  and 
penalties,  please  review  the  University  of  Toronto  Faculty  of  Applied  Science  and  Engineering 
Calendar. 

If  your  workload  is  such  that  you  are  feeling  totally  overwhelmed,  please  talk  to  the  Course 
Coordinator,  the  Course  Administrator,  First-Year  Counsellor,  or  the  Academic  Success  Centre 
(Koffler Centre). There are programs to assist you in learning how to cope with the University 
workload. 

In  this  course  you  will  be  submitting  your  assignments  to  Turnitin.com,  a  software  package 
licensed by the University of Toronto that is designed to detect plagiarism. Students agree that 
by  taking  this  course,  all  required  papers  will  be  subject  to  submission  for  textual  similarity 
review  to  Turnitin.com  for  detection  of  plagiarism.  All  submitted  papers  will  be  included  as 
source  documents  in  the  Turnitin.com  reference  database  solely  for  the  purpose  of  detecting 
plagiarism  of  such  papers.  The  terms  that  apply  to  the  University’s  use  of  the  Turnitin.com 
service are described on the Turnitin.com website. 

Submitting  a  document  to  Turnitin  that  is  different  than  the  version  you  submit  for  grade 
evaluation is an academic offense. 

Sharing Work outside Your Team 

Giving  another  team  access  to  documents  that  you  or  your  team  has  created  constitutes 
academic offence (cheating):  

•  Because you are enabling plagiarism to occur;  

•  Because  for  team  written  documents  you,  individually,  do  not  have  sole  ownership  of 
the  intellectual  property  (ideas  and  words)  contained  in  the  team  document.  It  is 
unethical  and  illegal  to  give  away  intellectual  property  that  does  not  belong  to  you 
without the permission of the owner, in this case the whole team. 

Sharing Work within Your Team 

Assignment feedback from a member of the teaching team belongs to the entire team. It is not 
acceptable  for  a  member  of  the  team  to  refuse  to  share  this  feedback.  Also,  it  is  the 
responsibility  of  each  team  member  to  make  available  to  their  team-mates  the  written  work 
they  have  prepared  for  the  shared  project.  This  includes  meeting  minutes,  notes  from  client 
interviews,  drafts  of  reports,  etc.  Withholding  work  that  pertains  to  the  team  project,  or 

9 

 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

feedback,  from  your  team-mates  is  considered  academic  dishonesty  and  demonstrates  poor 
team skills.  

If you are frustrated by the dynamics within your team, and/or your team-mates’ behaviour, it is 
important to address this in an appropriate and effective way. Your TA, CI, and PM (APS112 
only) can help you resolve these issues and help you, as a team, develop strategies for working 
successfully with each other. Remember: most projects do NOT fail for technical reasons they 
fail because of planning and team problems. 

Late Assignments, Missed Activities and Requests for Re-Marks 

This course will give you an idea of the professional environment you will likely be working in 
when  you  join  the  workforce.  As  such  we  have strict  policies  in  place to  govern  adherence  to 
deadlines and re-marking of deliverables (i.e. assignments). 

Late Assignments and Missed Activities 

Deadlines for course assignments are strictly enforced. Extra time to work on an assignment is 
not fair to others in the class who have not had the same opportunity. 

For each portion of 24 hour period past the deadline there is a 10-mark (out of 100) penalty on 
that  assignment.  Late  assignments  will  not  be  accepted  beyond  72  hours  past  the  deadline. 
After  that point,  a  grade  of  “zero”  will  be  assigned  and the  assignment  will  not be  evaluated. 
The weekend counts toward these penalties. 

Example:  If  the  deadline  is  Wed  Sep  18  at  12:10pm  and  you  submit  your 
assignment on Fri Sep 20 at 12:11pm, your assignment will be accepted but with 
a  30-mark  penalty.  If  you  try  to  submit  your  assignment  on  Sat  Sep  21  at 
12:11pm, it will NOT be accepted and you will receive zero on the assignment. 

An  assignment  is  only  considered  submitted  once  ALL  components,  as  per  the  assignment 
instructions,  of  the  assignment  are  submitted.  An  assignment  with  an  incomplete  submission 
will continue to accrue late penalties until the additional components are submitted or the 72 
hour maximum late period passes. 

Late penalties for team assignments apply to the entire team regardless of who was responsible 
for  submitting  the  document.  You  are  expected  to  have  a  team  process  in  place  so  that  all 
members of the team can verify that the assignment has been submitted. 

If you have a reason for a late assignment, a missed quiz or presentation, etc., you must submit 
a  Petition  for  Consideration  in  Course  Work  with  supporting documentation to the ESP  Office 
within a week of returning to class from illness, or a week from the assignment deadline.  

If you know in advance that you will miss a deadline for a mandatory course activity, such as an 
assignment, quiz or presentation, you must submit the petition before the date of the activity. 
In addition, you must apply before the deadline or activity to determine if there is a possibility 

10 

 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

for you to make up the work, or if an extension can be granted. Note: a petition does not excuse 
you from work. 

If  you  are  missing  mandatory  course  activity  due  to  religious  observances,  you  must  submit  a 
petition to the ESP office at least three weeks before the date of the activity. The three-weeks 
advance notice is in accordance with the University of Toronto’s policy on Accommodations for 
Religious Observances as students would normally be aware of upcoming religious observances 
and course activities in advance. 

Course work petitions for ESP are submitted as follows: 

•  Fill out the Petition for Consideration in  Course Work – Fillable PDF form posted in the 

Course Documents folder on the Blackboard course portal. 
•  Email the completed petition form to ESP:  esp@ecf.utoronto.ca 
• 

Include supporting documentation as applicable: 

o  Absence due to: 

 

in  GB149 

Illness:    Email  to  ESP  a  completed  petition  form,  and  bring  to  the  ESP 
Office 
form 
(http://www.illnessverification.utoronto.ca/)  signed  by  a  registered 
medical physician. 

a  Verification 

Student 

Illness 

of 

  Participation  in  athletic  or  other  types  of  competition:    Email  to  ESP  a 
completed petition form, and bring to the ESP Office in GB149 an official 
letter from the coach. 

o  Other  types  of  supporting  documentation  may  be  submitted  to  ESP  by  email 

(esp@ecf.utoronto.ca) or in the office (GB149) as appropriate. 

Re-marking of Assignments 
Requests for a remark due to an error in the grading will be heard by one of the course 
coordinators within one week of the return of an assignment to all tutorial sections. Students 
may request a meeting in person at the ESP Office to give evidence of the error and to explain 
the problem. Potential errors could include:  

•  TA misinterpreted a course concept 
•  Disagreement between the rubric and the comments on the document 

In the week of the return of an assignment, if there is an error in the marking, go to the ESP 
Office in GB149 to sign up for a meeting slot.  Prior to the meeting, share your Google Docs 
assignment file with esp@ecf.utoronto.ca (give us the “can edit” access to look at your revision 
history). Bring to the meeting the assignment’s marked rubric; a note with your name, student 
number (and team mates’ names and numbers if applicable) and brief descriptions of the 
marking errors; and any other supporting documentation/evidence to make your case. 

11 

 
 
 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

The results of the meeting will be provided to you by email. The results are final. Your grade 
may be raised OR lowered as a result of the remark request. For team assignments only one 
member of the team must attend, but all team members must have signed a letter indicating 
their desire to have a remark done.  

12 

 
 
