APS111&113 – 2012 – Midterm Case Study 

A portion of the questions of the midterm will pertain to this case study. You do not need 
to memorize this case study since it will be reproduced on the midterm exam booklet. 
You are however strongly encouraged to prepare this case study before the midterm. 
Preparation includes reading the case study carefully, ensuring that you understand 
what it is saying, and attempt to demonstrate your knowledge of the course content 
using the case study. 

Case Study - Preventing Terrestrial Wildlife Movement at Large Streams and 
Rivers 

(Taken from Innocentive Challenge ID #9932952 with minor modifications) 

Challenge Overview 
Large fenced in areas are being considered for the protection of Caribou in the boreal 
forest of northern Alberta. Predators are kept out of the area by fences, but this 
becomes problematic when the fence line inevitably crosses rivers or streams.  

The Oil Sands Leadership Initiative (OSLI; http://www.osli.ca/) is looking for creative and 
innovative ideas to prevent predators (Bears, wolves, coyotes) from crossing a line 
specific to a river or stream.  

The Oil Sands Leadership Initiative (OSLI) is a collaborative network of companies 
operating in the Canadian oil sands. Each OSLI company develops its assets 
individually, but works collaboratively to achieve significant improvements in key 
performance areas: environmental sustainability, social well-being and economic 
viability. To formalize this approach, in April 2010 ConocoPhillips Canada, Nexen Inc., 
Statoil Canada, Suncor Energy Inc. and Total E&P Canada Ltd. signed the OSLI 
Charter, agreeing to work collaboratively on non-competitive issues, and share research 
and best practices. Shell Canada joined in 2011. 

The initiative is founded on a common understanding among OSLI members of the 
need to work together to meet the challenges of responsible development. 

Detailed Description & Requirements 
Background 
The Oil Sands Leadership Initiative (OSLI) is investigating the feasibility of a project to 
reduce predation risk to Woodland Caribou in the northeast boreal forest of Alberta. 
Caribou are classified as "threatened" under Alberta's Wildlife Act and Canada's 
Species at Risk Act. The federal and provincial governments define threatened as "a 
species likely to become endangered if limiting factors are not reversed."  

Page 1 of 4 

 
 
APS111&113 – 2012 – Midterm Case Study 

One option being considered is to create “fenced safe zones” to protect caribou until 
sufficient functional habitat can be restored. The construction of a fence to exclude 
caribou predators such as wolves, bears and coyotes is being considered in the boreal 
forest of northern Alberta. This fence may run for hundreds of kilometers, enclose an 
area of thousands of kilometers-squared, and inevitably need to cross streams and 
rivers. These streams and rivers create several problems with respect to fencing such 
as:  

  Water level depth and width vary over the summer months  
  Streams may freeze solid over the winter  
  Rivers continue to run under the ice during the winter  
  Any structure rooted within the river will be impacted by ‘frost heave’ and 

movement of ice  

  Rivers may have debris floating downstream, such as downed trees  
  Streams may be in remote locations where regular maintenance will be difficult  
  Conventional fencing is not feasible across larger waterways and may violate 

some provincial and federal regulations concerning restriction of water flow and 
fish populations.  

A typical fence is shown below and is usually thick wire fencing, 2-3 meters high that is 
buried to some depth in the ground to prevent digging under it.  

A major issue with fenced enclosures is controlling the movements of predator (wolves, 
bears and coyotes). These are smart animals and excellent climbers so they can easily 
find small gaps or ways around the fence. Rivers and streams provide natural travel 
corridors for these animals and the intersection of fence and waterway will be ‘tested’. 
Since the conventional fence will probably stop at the high water mark of a stream or 
river, they can easily walk around it, especially when the water level is low during the 
summer months. Hence, the need for ideas for some type of innovative “barrier” across 
rivers and streams. Please refer to the figure below.  

Page 2 of 4 

 
APS111&113 – 2012 – Midterm Case Study 

There are also inherent challenges associated with working in the boreal forest. These 
can be very remote location to establish infrastructure (although monitoring of “fence” 
will be conducted once established). The diverse range of topography includes: bog, 
upland, riparian, fen, swamp with relatively poor drainage.  

The Challenge 
The Oil Sands Leadership Initiative (OSLI; http://www.osli.ca/) is looking for creative 
ideas for a “barrier” to prevent predators from breaching a protected, fenced area where 
the fence intersects with rivers and streams. Please note that the “barrier” does not 
necessarily mean a conventional fence or even a structure at all. It just has to prevent 
predators from entering the protected area along a line crossing a stream or river. Ideas 
should be as non-invasive as possible and avoid disturbing water flow, fish populations 
and even navigation (if the waterway is considered navigable).  

For this Challenge, the design team can assume watercourses are at least 3 meters 
wide and 0.5 meters deep – up to 50 meters wide and 10 meters deep.  

Any proposal should address as many of the following Technical Guidelines as 
possible.  

1.  The method (physical barrier or otherwise) will keep predators (bears, wolves, 

and coyotes) and ungulates (woodland caribou, moose, deer) from breaching an 
exclosure fence where the fence intersects with a river. Ideally the solution will 
not allow any breaches, although to be realistic, some breaches are acceptable. 
Generally speaking, a good solution will allow 1 to 5 breaches per year; a better 
solution will allow 1 or fewer breaches per year; the best solution will not allow 
any breaches.  

Page 3 of 4 

 
 
APS111&113 – 2012 – Midterm Case Study 

2.  The solution should cause the least amount of disturbance to the watercourse 

(as per the Canadian Department of Fisheries and Ocean’s regulation regarding 
fish habitat disruption http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/habitat/role/141/1415/14151-
eng.htm and Transport Canada’s navigable waters regulation 
http://www.tc.gc.ca/eng/marinesafety/tp-tp14838-3099.htm).  

(Note: We do not expect the design team to interpret all regulations to determine what 
100% “acceptable” is. Any solution will be subject to scrutiny by several governing 
bodies after the Challenge; however, the best solutions with the least amount of 
disturbance and infrastructure will be awarded, as determined by the OSLI, and brought 
up for consideration.)  

3.  The solution needs to ‘link up’ with conventional fencing for wildlife that will occur 
adjacent to the watercourse. If the solution is not a structure, there will be no 
physical “link”, but the design team should show how continuous protection is 
maintained across the stream and beyond.  

4.  Woodland caribou must also not be able to cross this perimeter fence (in the 

other direction). 

5.  The solution must work year round, irrespective of seasonal conditions, including 
snow, ice, moving frost lines, changing water levels, and temperature ranging 
from -40 to 40 °C. The solution will be utilized (and maintained) for at least 40 
years. 

6.  Any solution must not intentionally cause harm to any wildlife including an animal 

attempting a breach the barrier. 

Page 4 of 4 

 
