University of Toronto 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
Final Examination, December 06, 2013 
Duration: 2.5 hours 
APS111H1 F and APS113Y1 Y - Engineering Strategies & Practice 1 

Calculator Type: 4 (No electronic or mechanical devices permitted) 
Exam Type: A (Closed book, no aids permitted) 
Course Coordinator: Jason Bazylak 
Communication Coordinator: Peter Weiss 
Module B Coordinator: Jacinta O’Brien 

Instructions: 
This is a closed book exam; no calculators or aids are permitted, except for a translation-only 
dictionary, i.e., direct word-to-word translations but no definitions. There are two parts of the 
exam: multiple-choice questions, and a writing component. Read each question carefully. 

For the multiple-choice portion, provide the most correct answer to each question on the 
answer sheet. Only one answer is to be given for each question. Be sure to fill out the 
answer sheet clearly with no overlaps, using a pencil. Erase any errors completely. There 
are a total of 37 multiple-choice questions, each of which is worth about 1.6 marks, for a total 
of 60 marks worth 60% of the exam.  

The second part of the exam is a writing component worth 40% of the exam. Answer this 
part in the exam booklet carefully following the instructions. 

Write your name and student number on both the multiple-choice answer sheet (scan 
sheet) and the exam booklet where you do the writing component. When you are done with 
the exam, insert the answer sheet in the exam booklet and submit them together. 

Page 1 of 16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 1: 

Multiple-choice questions (60%)  

1. 

Figure 1 shows time along the horizontal axis and net cash flow along the vertical axis. 
A, B, and C represent: 
a.  A = Costs; B = Pay Back Period; C= Benefits 
b.  A = Net Loss; B = Break Even Point; C = Net Revenue 
c.  A = Outlay; B = Net Present Value; C = Income 
d.  A = Taxes; B = CPI; C = Profit 

Figure 1: Cash Flow Diagram 

2.  According to an article published in the November 25 edition of the Globe and Mail 

newspaper, an international team of engineers is studying owls, hoping the mysteries 
of their stealthy flight might lead to improvements in the design of everything from 
aircraft to submarines. The design approach that the engineers are using is called:  
a.  Life cycle assessment. 
b.  Bioaccumulation. 
c.  Pollution prevention. 
d.  Biomimicry. 

3. 

Industrial ecology uses a systems approach to optimize material and energy flows by 
using outputs from one process as inputs to another process. Industrial ecology has 
many benefits and has been successfully applied in Kalundborg, Denmark. However, a 
disadvantage of industrial ecology is that it: 
a.  Can only be applied in Europe. 
b.  Requires tax incentives to operate efficiently. 
c.  Does not encourage reduction of emissions and wastes. 
d.  Only works with linear systems. 

Page 2 of 16 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
4.  When you are working on an engineering design, knowing your stakeholders and 

anticipating their concerns is a strategy that can increase acceptance of your design. 
Stakeholder analysis is a useful approach for: 
a.  Identifying the stakeholders, prioritizing their interest and influence, and 

understanding their issues and concerns. 

b.  Connecting stakeholder interests to the Project Requirements. 
c.  Avoiding laws suits.  
d.  Government projects only, because private companies do not have to consider 

stakeholders. 

5.  Methods for choosing among different alternatives to solve an engineering design 
problem can be categorized as quantitative and qualitative. An example of a 
quantitative method is: 
a.  Environmental assessment. 
b.  Stakeholder analysis. 
c.  The engineering design process. 
d.  Break even analysis. 

6. 

7. 

The Critical Path Method was developed in 1960 by DuPont. It captures tasks, task 
durations, and how tasks relate to each other. It is a useful tool for managing 
engineering design projects because it identifies the "critical path", which is: 
a.  The minimum amount of time you need to finish the project. 
b.  Shown by a Venn diagram. 
c.  The maximum time from the beginning to the end of the project. 
d.  The route that your client has prioritized. 

In Ontario, the Professional Engineers Act and Regulation prescribe the Code of 
Ethics. Section 77 of Regulation 941 states that "it is the duty of a practitioner to the 
public, to the practitioner's employer, to the practitioner's clients, to other licensed 
engineers of the practitioner's profession, and to the practitioner to act at all times with 
(i) fairness and loyalty to the practitioner's associates, employers, clients, subordinates 
and employees; (ii) fidelity to public needs; (iii) devotion to high ideals of personal 
honour and professional integrity; (iv) knowledge of developments in the area of 
professional engineering relevant to any services that are undertaken; and (v) 
competence in the performance of any professional engineering services that are 
undertaken." This means that, once you become a licensed engineer, you: 
a.  Can decide when to apply the Code of Ethics depending on the type of project you 

are working on. 

b.  Do not need to seal engineering drawings. 
c.  Are not legally liable for your actions as a licensed engineer because engineering is 

a self-regulated profession. 

d.  Have a clearly defined duty to society, which is to regard the duty to public welfare 

as paramount. 

Page 3 of 16 

 
 
 
 
Questions 8 to 9 relate to the Team Case Study below. 

Aliyah, Bart, Chandak, and Derin are the four members of an APS111 team that has 
undergone significant storming. Bart, the original team leader, was highly aggressive in 
setting team goals, and quickly took over duties if anyone on the team showed signs of not 
meeting deadlines or quality expectations. This resulted in little buy in from the other team 
members and when Bart left, the team was stalled. After an intense team meeting Derin 
agreed to take over as team leader. She has been an effective leader acting quickly to make 
up for lost time by assigning all team members equal amounts of work on the project. 

8.  What strategy could Bart have used to better lead his team? 

a.  Write team rules that punished underperformers by assigning them earlier internal 

deadlines for the next assignment. 

b.  Have all team member submit their work to him for approval before allowing it to be 

put into the team document. 

c.  Remove any individuals work with more than three errors in it, rewrite it, and remove 

that person from the attribution table.  

d.  Replace internal deadlines with two-hour meetings where the team jointly combines 

the individual work into a team document.  

9.  What is Derin’s Bolton and Bolton leadership style? 

a.  Analytical 
b.  Driver 
c.  Expressive 
d.  Amiable 

Questions 10 to 33 pertain to Case Study #1: Enbridge Line 9B located in the appendix 
of this exam. 

10.  The mandate of the NEB is to promote safety and security, environmental protection 
and economic efficiency in the Canadian public interest within the mandate set by the 
Parliament of Canada in the regulation of pipelines, energy development and trade. 
The National Energy Board Act requires oil pipeline companies, such as Enbridge 
Pipelines Inc., to obtain approval from the NEB before building new pipelines or making 
changes to existing pipelines. The National Energy Board Act is an example of 
legislation that: 
a.  Balances environment, economy, and society. 
b.  Favours oil and gas companies. 
c.  Applies the precautionary principle. 
d.  Was developed by the Ontario government. 

Page 4 of 16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.  Benzene is an organic chemical compound found in crude oil. Studies in the scientific 

literature, including studies by Health Canada and the United States Environmental 
Protection Agency, have demonstrated that benzene breaks down in air and dissolves 
in water. The studies also demonstrated higher cancer rates among workers exposed 
to benzene. Based on the studies, benzene can be described as a compound that: 
a.  Bioaccumulates and is carcinogenic. 
b.  Bioaccumulates and is not carcinogenic. 
c.  Does not bioaccumulate and is not carcinogenic. 
d.  Does not bioaccumulate and is carcinogenic. 

12.  Fearing a repeat of the 2010 disaster on Line 6 in 2010 that saw over 3 million litres of 
oil spill into the Kalamazoo River, the municipalities of the Greater Toronto Area (GTA) 
are concerned about the potential impact of a spill from Line 9B on the quality of 
drinking water. This is because conventional municipal water treatment plants are not 
designed to treat water that is contaminated with crude oil. The municipalities 
participated at the Line 9B hearing and asked the NEB to require Enbridge to take 
actions that would reduce the chances of a release of crude oil from Line 9B. The 
actions the municipalities want Enbridge to take are intended to: 
a.  Mitigate risk. 
b.  Control pollution. 
c.  Reduce crude oil production. 
d.  Increase the price of gasoline. 

13.  The municipalities of the GTA are pressing for assurances any spills that do occur 

would be detected quickly in order to reduce the negative environmental impacts. As 
the engineer responsible for the design of the interface of the rupture detection system 
you have anticipated these concerns. You have conducted interviews of Enbridge 
personnel who were on the Line 6 rupture detection team in 2010 (see question 12) to 
identify problems in the relationship between the sensor system and the operators. You 
are using the Human Tech design principle of:  
a.  Shape Coding 
b.  Critical-Incident Technique 
c.  Feedback Design Principal 
d.  The Human Tech Ladder 

14. 

In 2009, Enbridge announced a plan of current and future actions to (1) support flexible 
community-based training specific to the pipeline sector, (2) invest in renewable and 
alternative energy technologies, and (3) deliver superior long-term value to Enbridge 
shareholders as measured by total shareholder return. The plan demonstrates 
Enbridge's commitment to:  
a.  Sustainability. 
b.  Prosperity. 
c.  Profitability. 
d.  Biodiversity. 

Page 5 of 16 

 
 
 
15.  Enbridge owns and operates Line 9B, and uses it to transport crude oil for its clients, 

which are companies such as Suncor Energy Inc. and Imperial Oil Ltd. Other 
companies that own and operate pipelines in Canada are TransCanada Pipelines and 
Keystone Pipelines, so there is competition for clients. Which of the following 
statements best describes what Enbridge did before deciding to file its application to 
the NEB:  
a.  Called the NEB and explained why the flow in Line 9B should be reversed. 
b.  Assigned its engineering department to prepare a business case to determine how 

to enhance Enbridge's share of the crude oil pipeline market. 

c.  Tested the corrosivity of crude oil on different types of internal pipeline coatings. 
d.  Examined the possibility of re-locating Line 9B to the United States. 

16. 

In 2010, the energy sector in Canada, including service stations and wholesale trade in 
petroleum products, provided direct employment for 356,000 people. This represented 
2.43 percent of all employment in Canada. If the Line 9B application is approved by the 
NEB, Enbridge predicts 6,000 more jobs will be created over a 10 year period, 
increasing energy sector employment to 2.47 percent. This increase in Canada's 
overall employment is the result of a: 
a.  Microeconomic Analysis. 
b.  Macroeconomic Analysis. 
c.  Change in Consumer Price Index. 
d.  Change in Gross Domestic Product. 

17.  Right now, Line 9B is used to transport foreign crude oil, including from Nigeria, which 

is among the top 10 oil-producing countries in the world. All of Nigeria’s oil and gas 
resources come from the Niger delta region, which is also home to many indigenous 
peoples including the Ogoni. One significant impact of the oil industry in Nigeria has 
been destruction of the mangrove forest, which serves as a habitat for fish and 
mollusks and is a source of raw materials for the Ogoni people. Due to pollution from 
the Nigerian oil industry, the mangrove forest can no longer support the subsistence life 
upon which the local Ogoni community depends. In the context of Line 9B, the loss of 
the mangrove forest is: 
a.  The cost of doing business. 
b.  Part of the life cycle cost of the pipeline. 
c.  An external cost. 
d.  An internal cost. 

18.  The loss of the mangrove forest in the Niger delta, and the subsequent impacts on the 

Ogoni community that depend on it, is an example of: 
a.  How design can impact social conditions. 
b.  Why it is better to ship foreign oil to Canada than use crude oil from the Alberta oil 

sands. 

c.  The importance of changing the service environment. 
d.  Poor decision making by local community leaders. 

Page 6 of 16 

 
 
 
19.  The public hearings that the NEB held in October, 2013, gave many individuals and 

organizations an opportunity to express their concerns and can be considered a good 
example of: 
a.  Taxpayer overexpenditure. 
b.  Government regulation. 
c.  Third party certification. 
d.  Stakeholder engagement. 

20.  There are a number of fixed and variable costs that Enbridge incurs to operate Line 9B. 

The pipeline lies within lands owned by municipalities, the provincial government, First 
Nations communities, and individuals, and Enbridge pays a monthly fee of $100,000 to 
lease the land from the landowners. Enbridge has a regulatory requirement to inspect 
200 valves located along Line 9B every year at a cost of $5,000 per inspection. The 
cost to pump the crude oil through the pipe is $0.02 per barrel. What is the annual cost 
to operate Line 9B if the application is approved and Enbridge uses the full capacity of 
300,000 barrels per day, but operates only 10 months of the year? 
a.  $4,190,000 per year. 
b.  $4,390,000 per year. 
c.  $4,025,000 per year. 
d.  $3,658,333 per year. 

21.  You have been hired to work on the capacity expansion of an oil refinery for a company 
in Sarnia. The company has given you the Gantt chart shown in Figure 2. Which of the 
following statements is TRUE?  
a.  You can calculate the critical path because the Gantt chart shows how much time is 

needed for each task. 

b.  The Gantt chart can be used as a project management tool because it shows when 

tasks occur. 

c.  How one task relates to another is not important for this project because there are 

only a few tasks to complete. 

d.  You only have 12 months to complete all the tasks, so there is not enough time to 

finish the project. 

Task 

Description 

1  Project Initiation 
2  Define Scope and Objectives 
3  Formulate Alternatives 
4  Evaluate Alternatives 
5  Analyze Stakeholder Concerns 
6 
Identify Preferred Alternative 
7  Presentation to Client 

2 

3 

4 

5 

Months 
7 

6 

8 

9  10  11  12 

1 
X 

X 

Figure 2: Gantt Chart 

Page 7 of 16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22. 

In the federal Storage Tank Systems for Petroleum Products and Allied Petroleum 
Products Regulations made under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, removal 
of storage tanks or any components of storage tanks that are covered by the 
Regulations is required to be supervised by a professional engineer. This requirement 
is an example of: 
a.  Environmental protection. 
b.  Demand-side legislation. 
c.  Public safety. 
d.  Poor public policy. 

23.  Your company has been hired by Enbridge to upgrade the pumps at the pumping 
stations along Line 9B. As the design engineer responsible for evaluating the 
alternatives, you have identified two options: (1) full head pumps, which are two-stage 
pumps with the impellers in series; and (2) half stage pumps with the impellers in 
parallel. Based on the cost and technical information from pump manufacturers shown 
in Table 1, the following recommendation can be made to Enbridge:  
a.  Full Head Pumps should be installed because the payback period exceeds the 

service life of the pumps. 

b.  Full Head Pumps should be installed because the service life is longer. 
c.  The capital cost for the Half Head Pumps is higher because they are twice as 

efficient as the Full Head Pumps. 

d.  Enbridge should install Half Head Pumps because the service life of the pumps is 

longer than the payback period. 

Table 1: Pump Options 

Alternative 
Full Head Pumps 
Half Head Pumps 

Capital Cost 
($) 
$200,000 
$360,000 

Annual Operating 
Savings ($/year) 

$15,000 
$52,000 

Service 
Life 
(years) 
10 years 
7 years 

24.  As the engineer in charge of pipeline operations, one of your tasks is to monitor and 
report on labour and equipment costs every quarter. This information is used in 
quarterly reports that Enbridge files with the Toronto Stock Exchange and makes 
available to shareholders. If the NEB approves the Line 9B application, you will need to 
hire more workers at the western end of the pipeline to supervise delivery of the crude 
oil to the refineries in Sarnia. Your research shows that labour costs in Ontario are 
higher than in Quebec, but the taxes Enbridge must withhold on Ontario worker salaries 
are lower. Which of the following reasons will you use to explain the differences?  
a.  Time value of money. 
b.  Inflation. 
c.  Supply and demand. 
d.  Regional variation. 

Page 8 of 16 

 
 
 
 
25.  Bitumen needs to be diluted so it can flow in pipelines and a common practice is to use 

naphtha, which is obtained from natural gas condensate. The naphtha is blended with 
the bitumen in ratios of up to 55%. Once the dilbit has been pumped to the refinery, the 
naphtha can be removed and returned to the bitumen production source for blending 
with the next quantity to be piped. Which of the following statements is TRUE? 
a.  Removing and returning naphtha to the production source for blending with another 

quantity of bitumen is an example of re-use. 

b.  Naphtha must be returned to the bitumen production source because it is too costly 

for the refineries to process. 

c.  The price of crude oil is lower than bitumen because there is no need to add 

naphtha to crude oil in order to transport it via pipeline. 

d.  Transporting dilbit by pipeline is not sustainable because the viscosity and density 

are too high for it to flow in the pipeline without adding naphtha. 

26.  Enbridge has hired your company to conduct a life cycle assessment (LCA) on its Line 

9B pipeline. Enbridge expects you to use one of the two standards for conducting life 
cycle assessments: ISO 14040 or ISO 14044. These standards explain the four-step 
process you should follow, including analysis of the inputs and outputs, assessment of 
the impacts, and interpretation of results so you can advise Enbridge how to improve its 
pipeline. However, the most important first step is for you to:  
a.  Develop a proposal to explain how you are going to conduct the LCA. 
b.  Sign the contract with Enbridge. 
c.  Agree with Enbridge on a manageable scope for the LCA. 
d.  Tell Enbridge how much the LCA will cost. 

27.  Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) is an internationally 

recognized standard for the construction industry to assess the environmental 
sustainability of building designs. LEED is a rating system that awards points for 
building attributes with a net environmental benefit. For example, points can be earned 
for using renewable energy. Enbridge's Line 9B would not qualify for a LEED 
designation because:  
a.  LEED only applies to buildings. 
b.  Crude oil cannot be recycled. 
c.  Pipelines already have net environmental benefits built in. 
d.  It is not allowed under the National Energy Board Act. 

28.  Maggie is an APS111 student doing her seminar presentation on the Enbridge Line 9B 

application. She takes the position that Enbridge’s application for reversal of Line 9B 
should be refused. The best argument for her position is:  
a.  Project benefits are limited when LCA determined externalities are factored in. 
b.  Numerous First Nations and environmental groups oppose the reversal as a threat 

to the water system integrity.  

c.  There may be more complications in implementation than indicated by Enbridge.  
d.  Greenpeace’s assumption that the pipeline will spill is valid.  

Page 9 of 16 

 
 
 
29. 

In her seminar presentation on the Enbridge Line 9B application Maggie uses the 
following sources of information:  

[1] Greenpeace. (2013). Stop the Enbridge pipeline [Website]. Available: 
http://www.greenpeace.org/canada/en/campaigns/Energy/tarsands/Get-involved/stop-
the-pipeline/  
[2] Enbridge. (2013) Looking at Enbridge’s Spill Record in 2009. [Website] Available: 
http://www.enbridge.com/AboutEnbridge/CorporateSocialResponsibility/Environment/L
ookingAtEnbridgesSpillRecord.aspx  

From these sources she uses the following information:  

"According to the environmental advocacy group Greenpeace between 1999-
2008, Enbridge had an average of one spill every week from its pipelines, 
however Enbridge regards its safety record as favourable, in comparison to 
other companies.” 

This is acceptable because: 
a.  Greenpeace is a reputable organization. 
b.  Enbridge presents unbiased figures on spills. 
c.  The data she provides from both Greenpeace’s and Enbridge's website support a 

valid conclusion. 

d.  She identifies the bias of Greenpeace. 

30.  For the Enbridge Line 9 Case Study, which of the following is a useful statement of 
Stakeholder, Interest, and Impact on the design’s Functions, Objectives and 
Constraints (FOC). 
Stakeholder 

Interest 

a. 

Industry groups  Profit 

b. 

c. 

Environmental 
groups 
First Nations 
Peoples 

Expose environmental 
problems 
Well-being of its 
communities 

d.  Enbridge 

Safety 

Impact on FOC 
Ensure that pipe line changes are 
approved quickly 
Close down and remove pipeline to 
restore natural environment 
Leak detection so that leaks can be 
spotted as early as possible 
Public information campaigns to 
prevent third-party damage 

Page 10 of 16 

 
 
 
 
 
31. 

Industrial ecology is sometimes referred to as “cradle-to-cradle” environmental 
management. The goal of industrial ecology is for man-made systems to emulate 
efficient, sustainable natural systems by optimizing the total materials and residuals 
cycle taking into consideration resources, energy, and costs. Your company would like 
to propose industrial ecology to Enbridge. One of the first things you must do is: 
a.  Solicit funds from the federal government so that Enbridge can retrofit its pipelines 

to accept compressed natural gas. 

b.  Identify companies, municipalities, and individuals who realize that waste and 

residuals from one process can be used as inputs to another process. 
c.  Wait for the NEB to release its decision about the Line 9B application. 
d.  Talk to the Ogoni community in Nigeria about the loss of the mangrove forest. 

32.  As the chief chemical engineer for Enbridge, your role is to test the chemical 

composition of dilbit, which is a combination of bitumen and a diluting agent such as 
naphtha. The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) has recently 
released a methodology for evaluating crude oils, including dilbit, under conditions 
normally occurring in oil and gas production, storage and transportation in pipelines. 
You ask your colleague about using the new methodology, but your colleague says not 
to bother because it will be more costly than looking up the information at the library. 
However, you decide to use the new methodology because:  
a.  You want to impress your boss. 
b.  It moves Enbridge closer to its environmental goal of a Triple Bottom Line. 
c.  The increased testing costs are within the budgetary limitations set by the project 

maintenance plan.  

d.  Relying on an internationally recognized standard-setting organization 

demonstrates due diligence. 

33.  As the design engineer working on the capacity expansion of an oil refinery in Sarnia, 
you have identified two feasible alternatives: (1) building three new distillation units on 
the existing property; or, (2) re-commissioning a nearby refinery that had been closed 
and trucking the crude oil from the existing property to the re-commissioned refinery. 
The local municipality favours Alternative (1) because it will bring construction jobs to 
the community. The Ontario Trucking Association favours Alternative (2) because it will 
mean work for haulers. Friends of the Earth Canada, a non-governmental organization, 
opposes both alternatives and wants you to look at biorefining. What can you do to 
resolve the conflicting interests of these stakeholders.  
a.  Ignore them; your client is the refinery and their interest is the most important. 
b.  Conduct a break even analysis of the two alternatives and show all the stakeholders 

that the preferred alternative is the one with the least cost. 

c.  Determine the relative importance of the influence of each category of stakeholder 
and then use a ranking and weighting method to identify the preferred alternative. 
d.  Change the performance targets to emphasize property values, air pollution, and 

crude oil prices, and re-evaluate the alternatives. 

Page 11 of 16 

  
 
End of Questions pertaining to Case Study #1: Enbridge Line 9B located in the 
appendix of this exam. 

34.  A key question about audience to ask when preparing a presentation is: 
a.  How can I get all the material I want to talk about into the time limit? 
b.  What assumptions can I make about what the audience already knows? 
c.  What is the most dramatic language possible to present this data? 
d.  What is the audience going to think of me, personally, when I am speaking? 

35.  The three factors that influence how effective your communication are, in order of 

importance, from most to lease important: 
a.  Words, tone, technical level. 
b.  Body language, technical level, tone. 
c.  Body language, tone, words. 
d.  Technical level, words, body language. 

36.  Which of the following statements is TRUE? 

a.  Functions are adjectives describing what the design must be.  
b.  Objectives are verbs describing what the design must be. 
c.  Secondary functions are adjectives resulting from the primary function. 
d.  Functions are verbs describing what the design must do. 

37.  Recently, owners of a particular model of vehicle manufactured by GM, the Chevy 

Cruze, have complained that the car does not get as many kilometres to the litre of gas 
as was promised by the manufacturer. They claim they were misled. The manufacturer 
says, in its defense, that many factors can affect fuel consumption, including driver 
behavior and road conditions. Some consumer advocates blame Canadian testing 
standards, saying that they are not as rigorous as those in the US. In fact, the 
Canadian government department responsible for tests is planning to introduce new 
tests by 2015. Which of the following statements, in relation to this issue, is both true 
and valid? 
a.  Car manufacturers should conduct the tests; then if they are not accurate, at least 

the consumer can sue the manufacturer. 

b.  Governments are unbiased and so they should supervise all testing; that way the 

standards will be fair to consumers. 

c.  The fact that new tests are being introduced implies that the previous tests did 

misinform the public. 

d.  The public has to get over the idea that tests are applicable to every case and 

accept it when things turn out differently. 

Page 12 of 16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 2:  

Long Answer Question (40%) 

INSTRUCTIONS: This question is based on Case Study #2: Sheltered Harbour 
Development. If you use Case Study #1, you will receive zero marks for this part of the 
exam.  

You may remove this page from the exam when answering this question. 

This question requires three written answers. Use an exam booklet, and write in your name, 
student number, course, and date of examination on the booklet’s cover page. You may use 
as many pages as you need for your preliminary work, but the final answers must be no 
more than four (4) pages single-spaced or eight (8) pages double spaced. Clearly indicate 
the final copy to be graded by writing “Final Copy” at the start of it. Use headings, 
subheadings, paragraphs, and bullet lists where appropriate. 

1.  Based on CASE STUDY #2: SHELTERED HARBOUR DEVELOPMENT, given below, 

create a table with the following information (15 marks): 

a.  Five relevant stakeholders, other than design team, client or users. 
b.  Identify stakeholder interests for each stakeholder; these must be independent 

of the design 

c.  Identify the impact of the interests on functions, objectives, and/or constraints 

Indicate how particular functions, objectives or constraints are related to human 
factors, economic or environmental concerns.  

2.  Based on the case given, in paragraph form (one or more paragraphs) write a concise 
Problem Statement in your own words. DO NOT COPY SENTENCES WORD-FOR-
WORD FROM THE CASE STUDY IN YOUR PROBLEM STATEMENT. YOU WILL 
RECEIVE NO MARKS FOR MATERIAL COPIED WORD-FOR-WORD FROM THE 
CASE STUDY. (15 marks) 

3.  In paragraph form, identify the scope of the design, the functional basis and provide a 

rationale in which you justify your design approach and show how meeting the 
functional basis will result in the outcome the client has asked for. In this brief, 
persuasive discussion, you will explain how the design approach will have the desired 
result and you will support that explanation with evidence. (10 marks) 

Page 13 of 16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You may remove this page in order to use it when answering questions 10 - 33. 

Case Study #1: Enbridge Line 9B 

Enbridge Pipelines Inc. owns and operates Line 9, a 762 mm (30-inch) diameter pipeline, 
originally constructed in the 1970s with a capacity of approximately 240,000 barrels per day. 
Line 9 extends 830 km from Sarnia, Ontario, to Montreal, Quebec, and was originally built as 
an eastbound pipeline. Line 9 comprises two segments: Line 9A from Sarnia to Westover, 
Ontario, and Line 9B from Westover, Ontario, to Montréal.  

Line 9 was originally designed to flow from west to east in order to transport crude oil from 
Western Canada to refineries in Québec. In 1998, the direction of flow was changed so that 
foreign oil from areas such as West Africa and the Middle East, which was then less costly, 
could be transported to refineries in Ontario. Currently, the pipeline transports foreign crude 
oil in a westbound direction from the Montréal Terminal to the Sarnia Terminal.  

Western Canadian crude oil is now priced significantly lower than foreign oil. As a result, on 
November 29, 2012, Enbridge made an application to the National Energy Board (NEB), as 
required by section 58 or Part IV of the National Energy Board Act, to reverse the flow of 
Line 9 to the originally designed west to east direction. Enbridge has already secured 
approval from the NEB to reverse the direction of flow in Line 9A on July 27, 2012. 

In addition to reversing the direction of flow in Line 9B, Enbridge's application also seeks to 
(1) increase the overall capacity in the pipeline from 240,000 to 300,000 barrels per day 
without increasing the pipe diameter and (2) allow the pipeline to be used to transport heavy 
crude oil, including diluted bitumen.  

The NEB held public hearings about the application in Montréal and Toronto during October, 
2013, and 40 participants, including First Nations, provincial and municipal governments, 
industry and environmental groups, and concerned citizens, made oral presentations 
explaining their views about Enbridge's application. The NEB is expected to release its 
decision about the application in early 2014. 

Page 14 of 16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You may remove this page in order to use it when answering questions for the long 

answer question. 

Case Study #2: Sheltered Harbour Development [1] 

Ultimate Suburbs Sheltered Harbour Development Corporation (USSHDC) is an international 
consortium of researchers and venture capitalists whose aim is to create, worldwide, new 
luxury suburbs entirely on water. These developments would be based on communities such 
as the Sea Village, a houseboat community on False Creek [2] or the Tanka community in 
southeast China’s Fujian province, where fishermen have lived on the sea since 700 A.D. 
For hundreds of years, until the current era, these people were not even allowed on the 
mainland and had to subsist entirely on water [3]. These two communities are an inspiration 
to the developers at USSHDC. 

At USSHDC, we are also interested in solving problems being faced in the world today. 
Increasing urbanisation is creating two related consequences – not only are the cities 
growing themselves and becoming more dense, but the needs of their residents require 
more land to be devoted to farming. With around 150,000 people moving to cities each day, 
the need for farmland will double in less than forty years. However, because this land is 
required for bio-fuel and other bio-related production, as well as for food stock, the world 
could well be facing a land shortage in the near future [4]. 

Currently, most major cities in the world are built along coastlines. With rising sea levels due 
to global warming, these cities will be subject to flooding [4]. While floods can be disasters 
and living on water may become a necessity, at USSHDC, our idea is to build a desirable 
lifestyle on water rather than face on-water living as an emergency response. 

We are seeking proposals for designs that will resolve one or more of the issues that will be 
faced by this kind of community. Proposals are being sought in the following areas: 

1.  Food production, including but not limited to 

a.  Sustainable fish-farming, without the use of antibiotics and/or genetically 

modified feed 

b.  Liquid growth media utilizing phosphorus harvested from the ocean 
c.  Algae farming methods utilizing waste products from current on-land urban 

areas 

d.  Water desalination and purification 

2.  Offshore sustainable power sources, including but not limited to ocean thermal 

electric conversion. 

3.  Sustainable, flood-proof building technologies that will be able to withstand storms. 
4.  New materials that will be able to withstand destructive forces inherent in the on-sea 

or at-sea environment. 

5.  Technologies to transport floating houses in cases where people require relocation 

[4]. 

Page 15 of 16 

 
 
 
 
 
Major issues that will have to be addressed in developing new, on-water communities 
include environmental impact, size and configuration of homes, safety, recreation 
opportunities [5] and relation to other shoreline uses. Obviously building on water will impact 
the ecosystem, even before we consider the possibilities of fish-farming or other kinds of on 
water food production. USSHDC wants to minimize negative environmental impact and 
maximize positive environmental impact. Size and configuration of homes will be a factor in 
the marketability of on-water luxury dwellings, which must compete with the kinds of home 
sizes available on land. USSHDC will want the most desirable and competitive designs. 
Living on water carries a different set of safety concerns than living on land and at USSHDC 
we favour family, rather than all-adult, communities. Also relevant to family communities are 
the recreational opportunities that should be available to make a USSHDC suburb desirable. 
While having a boat moored to your house, rather than a car parked, is an exciting idea, 
other forms of recreation must be taken into account to make the area a satisfying place to 
live for all ages. Finally, sheltered shorelines near to cities may already be in use for hotels 
and resorts; USSHDC designs must complement and add value to these enterprises, not 
detract from their desirability. 

USSHDC looks forward to your proposals. Your company may choose one or more of the 
areas listed above, but must justify that choice and its scope in relation to our timeline: we 
are planning for our first prototype Sheltered Harbour City to be built and inhabited by 2020. 

References: 
[1] C. Deist. (2013, Nov. 1) Ocean living: A step closer to reality. BBC News. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20131101-living-on-the-ocean  
[2] Venture Vancouver 2013. (2013) Granville Island Boathouses on False Creek, the Sea 
Village. [Online]. Available: http://www.venturevancouver.com/false-creek-boat-houses-
granville-island  
[3] Daily Mail Reporter. (2013, Oct. 9) China's floating fishing cities. Mail Online. [Online] 
Available: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2451023/Chinas-Tanka-boat-peoples-
floating-homes.html  
[4] R. de Graaf. (2013, Nov. 12) We’re running out of land, so let’s build on water. TEDxDelft. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0deiRRqWLgU  
[5] Scottish Canals. (2012) Choose a life less ordinary. [Online] Available: 
http://www.livingonwater.co.uk/index.php/homepage/show/home/home  

Page 16 of 16 

 
 
 
 
