University of Toronto 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
Final Examination, December 11, 2015 
Duration: 2.5 hours 
APS111H1 F and APS113Y1 Y - Engineering Strategies & Practice 1 

Calculator Type: 4 (No electronic or mechanical devices permitted) 
Exam Type: A (Closed book, no aids permitted) 
Course Coordinator: Micah Stickel 
Communication Coordinator: Peter Weiss 
Module B Coordinator: Jacinta O’Brien 

Instructions: 
This is a closed book exam; no calculators or aids are permitted, except for a translation-only 
non-electronic dictionary, i.e., direct word-to-word translations but no definitions.  

To start:  Fill out both the answer sheet (scan sheet) and the exam booklet (blank lined 
booklet) with: 

•  Your name 
•  Your student number 
•  Your course (APS111 or APS113) 
•  Today’s date 
•  You do not need to fill out the course instructor or form code. 

There are two parts to the exam: multiple-choice questions, and a writing component.  

Multiple-Choice (60%): 

•  There are a total of 34 multiple-choice questions, each of which is worth about 1.7 

marks, for a total of 60 marks worth 60% of the exam.  

•  Answer this part on the answer sheet (scan sheet). 
•  Read each question carefully and provide the most correct answer on the answer 
sheet:  do not answer the multiple-choice questions on these exam question pages. 

•  Only one answer is to be given for each question.  
•  There is no penalty for incorrect answers. 
•  Be sure to fill out the answer sheet clearly with no overlaps, using a pencil.  
•  Erase any errors completely.  

Writing Component (40%): 

•  The second part of the exam is a writing component worth 40% of the exam.  
•  Answer this part in the exam booklet: do not answer the written component questions 

on these exam question pages. 
•  Carefully follow the instructions.  

When you are done the exam, insert the answer sheet (scan sheet) into the exam booklet 
and hand in both together. You may keep the question pages. 

Page 1 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 1: 

Multiple-choice questions (60%)  

1.  Hydrogen has been proposed as a fuel for internal combustion engines, in part 

because the only emissions are heat and water. However, hydrogen is difficult to store, 
it takes up too much volume at room temperature, and is dangerous when compressed.  
To overcome these difficulties, nanotubes can be used.  Nanotubes offer a very large 
surface area within a very small volume; however, they are very costly.  Scientists have 
demonstrated that heating waste chicken feathers creates structures that are almost 
identical to nanotubes at a much lower cost, thereby offering an economically and 
technically feasible alternative to nanotubes.  Using the waste chicken feathers to store 
hydrogen is an example of which one of the 3Rs? 
a.  Reduce. 
b.  Reuse. 
c.  Recycle. 
d.  Renew. 

2.  Professional engineering in Canada is a self-regulated profession.  The philosophy 
underlying self-regulated professions is that the members of the profession are the 
most appropriate group of individuals to determine the standard of professional 
competence and ethics required to protect the public.  Professional engineering is also 
a "closed" profession.  This means that professional engineering in Canada is: 
a.  Available to only a limited number of practitioners because there is an upper limit to 

the number of professional engineering licenses there are in Ontario. 

b.  Restricted to only those individuals who are deemed qualified to be professional 

engineers. 

c.  Open only to applicants who have graduated from an accredited engineering 

program. 

d.  A very expensive career path. 

3.  Researchers at the Delft University of Technology have developed "bioconcrete" using 
a type of bacteria that is naturally found in highly alkaline lakes or inside certain rocks. 
When the bacteria are added as an ingredient to concrete, the bacteria induce the 
formation of calcite, which can stop the formation of cracks.  Using bacteria to prevent 
the formation of cracks in concrete is an example of which of the following?   
a.  Biomagnification. 
b.  Pollution Control. 
c.  Sustainability. 
d.  Biomimicry. 

4.  A by-law is: 

a.  A law made by a municipal government that applies within its own boundaries. 
b.  A provincial law that applies to municipalities. 
c.  A law that applies to retail stores. 
d.  A federal regulation. 

Page 2 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
5.  Which statement best describes bioaccumulation? 

a.  The entry of persistent toxic substances into the environment. 
b.  The build-up of persistent toxic substances in the fatty tissues of organisms. 
c.  The concentration in the tissues of an organism of substances occurring in the 

environment.  

d.  The increase in the concentration of a substance in the tissues of organisms at 

successively higher levels in a food chain. 

6. 

In designing the Telehealth system, Intel Corporation considered a number of issues 
about the users of the system, including their age, their lack of technology awareness 
and limited computer skills, their isolation, and their lack of mobility.  Which of the 
following statements best describes Intel Corporation's approach?  
a.  Balancing economy, environment and social considerations. 
b.  Accounting for social considerations in design. 
c.  Stakeholder engagement. 
d.  Changing cultural values. 

7.  Which of the following definitions for Adaptive Capacity is TRUE? 

a.  An industrial system that emulates an efficient, sustainable natural system. 
b.  The ability of a product or system to adjust to changing environmental conditions. 
c.  Using a graphic decision chart and a weighted decision matrix to choose among 

alternatives. 

d.  A rigorous method for analyzing the production, operating, and end-of-life 

environmental costs for a technology in terms of mass and energy. 

8. 

9. 

In Ontario law, good character comprises three components, including the courage to 
do what is right, no matter the personal consequences.  This component of the Ontario 
law is also referred to as which of the following? 
a.  Due diligence. 
b.  Code of Ethics. 
c.  Whistle-blower clause. 
d.  Professional Engineers Ontario. 

Lead occurs naturally in the environment and is an important element used in paints, 
pipes, and car batteries.  Lead is also released back into the environment during lead 
battery recycling.  Exposure to moderate concentrations of lead can cause neurological 
damage, especially in children.  A company is considering different locations for a new 
lead battery recycling facility.  As part of the economic evaluation, the company's 
design engineer estimated the cost to provide health care to children who live near the 
lead battery recycling facility.  What is this type of cost? 
a.  Fixed Cost. 
b.  Internal cost. 
c.  External cost. 
d.  Variable cost. 

Page 3 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
10.  Sustainability is defined as the intersection of economic, environmental, and social 

considerations, as shown in Figure 1.  It is also possible to define the intersection of 
each pair of considerations.  Which one of the following describes the intersections of 
(A) environmental and social considerations, (B) economic and social considerations, 
and (C) economic and environmental considerations? 
a.  "A"=Vulnerable; "B"=Feasible; "C"=Fair". 
b.  "A"=Feasible; "B"=Viable; "C"=Equitable".  
c.  "A"=Beneficial; "B"=Equitable; "C"=Viable". 
d.  "A"=Beneficial; "B"=Exponential; "C"=Questionable". 

Figure 1. Chart for Question 10. 

11.  Which of the following statements about present worth is TRUE? 

a.  Present worth relies on simple interest calculations and a fixed interest rate. 
b.  Present worth is only used for private sector engineering design projects. 
c.  Present worth cannot be applied to external costs and benefits. 
d.  Present worth is calculated by discounting future cash flows. 

12.  Which of the following statements about laws is TRUE? 

a.  It is mandatory for design engineers to comply with legislation and regulations, but 

there is no legal requirement for design engineers to comply with policies or 
guidelines. 

b.  When there is a federal election and the political party that is elected changes, all 

federal laws must also change. 

c.  The City of Toronto and the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) can 

create laws. 

d.  Due diligence is not relevant to engineering designs. 

Page 4 of 17 

  
 
 
 
 
13.  Based on the Brundtland Commission definition of sustainable development, which of 

the following statements is TRUE? 
a.  Sustainable development does not affect rare or endangered species. 
b.  Sustainable development enables future generations to meet their needs. 
c.  Sustainable development meets the needs of people in developing countries. 
d.  Sustainable development will help the Lego Group to build the new sustainability 

centre. 

14.  Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of costs as a function of output.  Which of 

the following statements is TRUE? 
a.  Line 0-X represents the fixed cost and Line X-X represents the variable cost. 
b.  Line 0-Y represents the variable cost and Line X-Z represents the total cost.  
c.  Line 0-X represents the indirect cost and Line X-X represents the total cost.  
d.  Line X-Z represents the fixed cost and Line X-X represents the total cost. 

Figure 2. Chart for Question 14. 

15.  Which one of the following statements best describes compounds that are 

biodegradable? 
a.  Compounds that are biological. 
b.  Compounds that cause harm to humans.  
c.  Compounds that remain in the environment. 
d.  Compounds that break down via natural processes.  

16.  NGOs, such as Greenpeace and the Conference Board of Canada, are stakeholders 

that may have an interest that is affected by your design.  NGO stands for: 
a.  Next Generation Optimization.  
b.  New Government Organization. 
c.  Non-Governmental Organization. 
d.  Nouveau Gouvernement de l'Ontario.  

Page 5 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17.  Life cycle assessment is different from industrial ecology because: 

a.  Life cycle assessment ends with the final disposal of the product, whereas industrial 
ecology considers uses for the product after the end of the products service life.  
b.  Life cycle assessment has been applied to many different products and systems, 

but industrial ecology has only been applied at Kalundborg, Denmark. 

c.  Life cycle assessment applies to products and industrial ecology is restricted to 

large-scale industries. 

d.  Life cycle assessment identifies waste emissions, whereas industrial ecology 

identifies waste emissions as inputs to other industrial processes.  

18.  The supply of and demand for labour, the cost of a barrel of crude oil, and the Bank of 

Canada interest rate are all examples of what type of factors?   
a.  Microeconomic.  
b.  Macroeconomic. 
c.  Triple Bottom Line.  
d.  Engineering Economic. 

19.  Which one of the following statements about stakeholders is TRUE?   

a.  For private sector projects, the government has limited interest and little influence. 
b.  Design engineers can ignore the public because they usually have little interest and 

no influence. 

c.  The Ontario Environmental Assessment Act does not require stakeholder 

consultation.  

d.  For public sector projects, where the government is the client, the government has 

high interest and high influence.  

20.  A group of designers has been given the task of improving the ticket vending machine 

for the Austrian Railway. They spend some time watching how passengers interact with 
the current design, considering the steps the passengers followed, the amount of time it 
took and the mistakes made. This process is: 
a.  Task analysis. 
b.  Snapshot. 
c.  Participatory design. 
d.  Organizational Human Factors.  

<<More questions on next page>> 

Page 6 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.  Team X is “storming” – their first assignment did not receive the grade they had hoped. 
Now they are trying to agree on a schedule and work breakdown, but one member, 
Lee, is getting angry at Jackie. The rest of the team does not understand why. Jackie is 
saying she can make it to any of the meetings, but she is sitting with her arms folded in 
front of her, not making eye contact and speaking without inflection. This shows that, in 
communication,  
a.  Words often have more influence than body language and tone. 
b.  Tone often has more influence than words and body language. 
c.  Body language and tone often have more influence than words. 
d.  Body language, tone and words all have equal influence.  

Q22 - 34 pertain to Case Study #1: Lego Goes Sustainable located in Appendix A. 

22.  The Lego Group conducted two life cycle assessments (LCAs): one for the existing 
fossil fuel-based plastic and one for a new plastic that uses corn as the primary 
ingredient.  The Lego Group limited the scope of each LCA to raw material extraction, 
raw material transport, formation of the plastic, and toy brick production.  The LCAs 
followed procedures described in ISO 14040 and ISO 14044, and collected and 
assessed information about air and water emissions, solid waste generation, and 
energy requirements for each type of plastic.  The results of the LCAs indicated that 
neither type of plastic was environmentally preferable.  This means the LCAs: 
a.  Should be redone at the Lego Group's sustainability centre. 
b.  Provide information about current processes and can serve as baselines when the 

Lego Group conducts future LCAs. 

c.  Must have a different scope to ensure the results identify which plastic is less 

environmentally harmful. 

d.  Were a waste of time and money. 

23.  The Lego Group has factories in Denmark, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Mexico.  
It will soon open a new factory in China.  The Lego Group uses a cost index published 
by Thomson Reuters / Jefferies CRB to account for the wages paid to workers who 
make the toy bricks at the different factory locations.  By using a cost index the Lego 
Group is able to account for which one of the following factors? 
a.  Inflation. 
b.  Present worth. 
c.  Regional Variation. 
d.  Time value of money. 

<<More questions on next page>> 

Page 7 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24.  LEGO® toy bricks have a very high product safety rating, with zero product recalls every 
year for the last 5 years.  To demonstrate this high level of safety to consumers in 
Canada who buy the toy bricks for their children, the Lego Group relies on:  
a.  Demand-side legislation. 
b.  Children who volunteer to test the toy bricks. 
c.  Certification by the Canadian Standards Association. 
d.  Plastic that is formed using fossil fuels extracted from the Alberta oil sands. 

25.  The Lego Group has hired you as the chief design engineer to locate and build the new 
sustainability centre.  Instead of locating the new centre in Billund, the Lego Group has 
chosen a location on the island of Vadehavet, which is about 120 kilometres west of 
Billund off the west coast of Denmark.  The site is remote with a local population of less 
than 100 residents, and is currently without road access.  Your assignment is to identify 
and evaluate all the steps required to access the site, build the new sustainability 
centre, and establish transport routes for bringing workers and materials to the centre.  
As part of your assignment, which of the following should you do?  
a.  Assume Canadian design practices and standards can be applied. 
b.  Not worry about the local residents, since the new sustainability centre will take 
precedence and the Lego Group will pay for the residents to be relocated to the 
Danish mainland. 

c.  Avoid developing a range of options because the shortest distance to the new 
centre will have the least cost and must be chosen as the preferred design. 

d.  Consider the possible impacts of the new sustainability centre and its operations on 

local residents and the local environment. 

26.  LEGO(cid:147) toy bricks are made in manufacturing facilities that incur a number of different 
types of costs.  Which one of the following statements about the costs of the toy bricks 
is TRUE? 
a.  The cost of the plastic used to the produce the toy bricks represents a fixed 

operating cost. 

b.  Rent and taxes paid for the manufacturing facility are variable costs. 
c.  The cost of advertising LEGO(cid:147) toy bricks is a direct cost. 
d.  Workers wages are an indirect cost. 

<<More questions on next page>> 

Page 8 of 17 

 
 
 
 
27.  As a design engineer, you have been asked by the Lego Group to investigate the 

possibility of implementing an industrial symbiosis (industrial ecology) as one of the 
criteria for evaluating different locations for the new sustainability centre.  You know 
that many global companies have manufacturing facilities located in Billund, including 
Bang & Olufsen, Ecco, and CCI Europe. You agree to use the criterion, but you want to 
ensure the Lego Group fully understands the principles, so you explain that one of the 
following statements about industrial ecology is FALSE:  
a.  Most inputs should be obtained through recycling. 
b.  Industries should minimize the use of materials and energy. 
c.  Products should be designed so they have a finite service life. 
d.  Products and processes can produce residuals, but not wastes. 

28.  During the production of LEGO(cid:147) toy bricks, excess heat is released into the 

atmosphere as the heated plastic is injected into the moulds.  The Lego Group 
estimates the annual amount of waste heat is sufficient to meet the energy needs of 
500 households.  The Lego Group has hired you as the design engineer to build a 
system to capture the excess heat and convert it to electricity.  Which of the following 
terms best describes what you have been asked to do with the excess heat? 
a.  Reuse. 
b.  Reduce. 
c.  Recover. 
d.  Renewable. 

29.  The year is 2030, and you have been hired as a design engineer by the Lego Group to 

work at their sustainability centre.  You have been experimenting with different 
materials that could be used instead of the fossil-fuel based plastic, and you have 
identified 3 potential substitutes:  milk protein, polycaprolactone (PCL), and silica.  The 
Lego Group has given you 3 objectives for the new sustainable material: (1) heat 
resistance up to 310°C, (2) compatibility with existing toy brick moulds, and (3) 
manufacturing costs using the new sustainable material not to exceed current costs.  
To compare how well the different materials satisfy the objectives, you propose to use 
a decision-making method.  Which of the following statements best describes which 
method you will use and why?  
a.  Multi-voting, because it is simple to use and provides a high degree of confidence. 
b.  Graphic decision chart, because it can be used for more than 2 objectives. 
c.  Pugh Method, because it is simple to use and works best with only a few 

alternatives. 

d.  A risk-based model, because it is simple to use and captures the significant risks 

involved in changing the plastic used for the toy bricks. 

Page 9 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
30.  As the design engineer hired by the Lego Group, you plan to use the scale shown in 

Table 1 to evaluate the new sustainable materials against the 3 objectives of (1) heat 
resistance up to 310°C, (2) compatibility with existing toy brick moulds, and (3) 
manufacturing costs using the new sustainable material not to exceed current costs. 
The Lego Group has determined the weight for each objective, and this information is 
shown in Table 2, which also shows the value you have assigned to each alternative to 
indicate how well it meets each objective.  Using a weighted matrix method, which of 
the following recommendations would you make to the Lego Group?  
a.  Milk protein is the preferred new sustainable material because it was the alternative 

with the highest weighted score. 

b.  PCL is the preferred new sustainable material because it satisfies all 3 objectives 

equally. 

c.  Silica is the preferred new sustainable material because it was the alternative with 

the highest weighted score. 

d.  None of the alternatives are preferred because the standard deviation of the results 

is less than 10%. 

Table 1 for Question 28. 

Scale 

Does not meet the objective 
Somewhat meets the objective 
Mostly satisfies the objective 
Almost completely satisfies the objective 
Fully satisfies the objective 

Value 
0 
2 
5 
8 
10 

Table 2 for Question 28. 

Objective 

(1) Heat resistance up to 310°C 
(2) Compatibility with existing toy brick moulds 
(3) Manufacturing costs using the new 
sustainable material not to exceed current 
costs 

Values for Each 
Alternative 

Weight 
2 
6 
3 

Milk 
Protein 
2 
8 
2 

PCL 
5 
5 
5 

Silica 
10 
5 
2 

31.  What price should the Lego Group charge for the toy bricks so that the payback period 
is equal to the time between now and the opening of the new sustainability centre, 
assuming the number of toy bricks sold annually remains constant? 
a.  0.02¢ per toy brick. 
b.  0.03¢ per toy brick. 
c.  0.038¢ per toy brick. 
d.  0.0002¢ per toy brick. 

Page 10 of 17 

 
 
 
 
32.  The Lego Group has decided to build a manufacturing facility in Ontario.  They are 
using the same production processes as all the other factories that build LEGO(cid:147) toy 
bricks, including the same packaging.  Recently, the Ontario government announced 
new legislation that will come into effect in 2030 that would make manufacturers legally 
responsible for the packaging they use for their products.  Since LEGO(cid:147) toy bricks 
come in cardboard boxes, this means the Lego Group:  
a.  Must implement pollution prevention to control the production of the cardboard 

packaging. 

b.  Can create a program to recycle the packaging. 
c.  Will close their Ontario manufacturing facility because complying with the new law 

will be too costly. 

d.  Does not have to do anything because the legislation is not mandatory. 

33.  After graduating in 2019, you relocated to Denmark and began working for the Lego 
Group, rising from an entry level position as a design engineer to the head of the 
research and development department.  In your current role, you supervise a team of 
chemical, electrical, industrial and materials engineers working on new LEGO(cid:147) 
products and you have responsibility for developing raw material specifications and 
negotiating raw material prices.  A former U of T classmate works for a plastics 
manufacturer and has contacted you about becoming a supplier.  The Lego Group has 
a policy that states all suppliers should be evaluated through a competitive process, 
except under special circumstances. Vendors must pay the Lego Group to participate 
in the process.  Your classmate has offered you a cash payment (equal to half the cost 
of participating in the competitive process) if you allow your classmate's company to 
become a supplier to the Lego Group without going through the competitive process.  
What action should you take and why? 
a.  Allow your classmate's company to bypass the competitive process, but do not 

accept the cash payment. 

b.  Talk to your boss about the policy to find out if your classmate's company qualifies 

for the special circumstance exemption.  

c.  Encourage the classmate to follow the competitive process and do not accept the 

cash payment because doing so would put you in a conflict of interest. 
d.  It does not matter what you do because you are not a licensed professional 

engineer and a policy is not a legal requirement. 

<<More questions on next page>> 

Page 11 of 17 

 
 
 
 
34.  A new LEGO® design engineer proposes an “out-of-the-box” idea for the sustainable 
toy bricks – they will be the same sizes and weights as the current bricks but look 
completely different. His supervisor challenges this idea on the basis of how humans 
interact with technology – her reasoning is: 

a.  On a political level, the new shapes look like aircraft control mechanisms and 

therefore should not be used. 

b.  On a psychological level, the new toys are more intuitive when they look like 

the existing toys. 

c.  On a physical level, the shapes the designer is proposing will require new 

shapes of packaging. 

d.  On a social level, the company is doing enough by introducing sustainability – it 

does not need more ideas. 

End of questions pertaining to Case Study #1: Lego Goes Sustainable located in 
Appendix A. 

End of multiple-choice questions. 

<<Long-answer questions start on the next page>> 

Page 12 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 2:  

Long Answer Questions (40%)  

Questions 35 to 37 are based on Case Study #2: RFP for a Security System for 
Foldable Electric Cars, located in Appendix B. 

INSTRUCTIONS: This section requires 3 written answers. Use an exam booklet, and write in 
your name, student number, course, and date of examination on the booklet’s cover page. 
You may use as many pages as you need for your preliminary work, but the final answers 
must be no more than four (4) pages single-spaced or eight (8) pages double spaced. 
Clearly indicate the final copy to be graded by writing “Final Copy” at the start of it. Use full 
sentences and paragraphs and bullet lists where appropriate. 

This section of the exam evaluates your ability to 

•  Communicate in clear, concise, well-organized sentences and paragraphs with minimal 

error 

•  Structure a logical argument, making clear claims and supporting them with the evidence 

currently available to you 

•  Recognize the kinds of information you would need, moving forward, to validate and 
better support your claims and generate specific questions to help you find that 
information 

•  Read, understand, and analyse engineering-related material under time pressure 

35.  Based on Case Study 2: RFP for a Security System for Foldable Electric Cars, located 

in Appendix B, in paragraph form (one or more paragraphs) write a concise Problem 
Statement in your own words. DO NOT COPY SENTENCES WORD-FOR-WORD 
FROM THE CASE STUDY IN YOUR PROBLEM STATEMENT. YOU WILL RECEIVE 
NO MARKS FOR MATERIAL COPIED WORD-FOR-WORD FROM THE CASE 
STUDY. (20 marks) 

36.  Based on Case Study 2: RFP for a Security System for Foldable Electric Cars located 

in Appendix B, generate Functions, Objectives and Constraints. Utilize course tools 
such as Functional Basis and Functional Decomposition. In total, you should have 
about 10 items, whether they are Primary Functions, Secondary Functions, Unintended 
Functions, Objectives or Constraints. Treat this like a section of a design document 
with a section introduction and sub-sections. Introduce each of the sub-sections (e.g. 
Functions, Objectives, Constraints) with a few sentences that help the reader 
understand their nature and significance. (15 marks) 

37. 

Identify five key research questions you would want to answer in order to check the 
validity of your claims and to develop the three top objectives further. (Don’t worry 
about whether the questions are open or closed.) (5 marks) 

End of all questions for this exam. 

Page 13 of 17 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page is intentionally left blank. 

The appendices (case studies) start on the next page. 

Page 14 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You may remove the appendix in order to use it when answering questions. 

Appendix A: Case Study #1: LEGO(cid:147) Goes Sustainable  

The Lego Group first introduced its shiny, hollow-tubed plastic rectangular toy bricks in 1958.  

Source: http://www.lego.com/en-us/aboutus/media-library#?filter&ids=7aa7836d702840bfb024e51c7b0b9d10 

The plastic used by the Lego Group to make its toy bricks is fossil fuel-based.  During the 
manufacturing process, the plastic is heated to between 230°C (degrees Celsius) and 
310°C, and then injected into moulds.  The force used to inject the heated plastic into the 
moulds can reach 29,000 psi (pounds per square inch).  In comparison, the tire pressure for 
the average car does not usually exceed 43 psi.  The moulds used to manufacture the toy 
bricks are accurate to within 0.0004 mm (millimetres).  The Lego Group has factories in 
Denmark, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Mexico.  It will soon open a new factory in 
China.  All LEGO(cid:147) toy bricks are fully compatible with each other, regardless of when (from 
1958 to today) or where they were made.   

According to the Lego Group, the plastic “offers great quality, fulfills the highest safety 
standards, and lasts for a long time making it a very durable product”.  In 2014, Lego Group 
produced more than 60 Billion toy bricks. 

In July, 2015, Lego Group announced that it will search for a new sustainable material to 
replace the fossil fuel-based plastic for its toy bricks.  The Lego Group is investing $150 
million to build a sustainability centre in Billund, a small town on Denmark’s Jutland 
peninsula, to investigate alternative materials. The Lego Group wants to start production of 
its toy bricks using the new sustainable material by 2030.  

Page 15 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B: Case Study #2: RFP for a Security System for Foldable Electric Cars 

At the Toronto-based start-up, Vision 20/20 Inc., we are in the business of creating products 
for the future. As such, we are seeking proposals for a security device for electric folding 
cars. Three such automobile designs currently exist: 
-  The Hiroko developed by Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and a Spanish 

redevelopment agency, DENOKINN [1]; 

-  The Armadillo-T developed by the Korean Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 

(KAIST) [2]; 

-  The Casple Podadera developed by the Spanish business group Casple and the 

designer Francisco Podadera [3]. 

Figure 1: Diagram of Hiroko Folding car, from G. Munro [1] 

Figure 2: Armadillo-T driving and folded configurations. From K. Munro [2] 

Page 16 of 17 

 
 
 
Figure 3: Casple-Podadera driving and folded configurations. From A. MacKenzie [3] 

Measuring between 2.30 and 2.80 metres in use and between 1.65 and 1.90 metres when 
folded [1-3], these two person vehicles are the ultimate answer to the challenges of city 
driving and city parking! Up to three of these could fit in a conventional Toronto parking 
space (5.6*2.6 metres) [4]. So, how it works is, the driver finds a parking spot about a third of 
the size of a normal spot, gets out of the car, folds it and parks it through a smart phone app.  
However, at Vision 20/20, we foresee a major drawback for these cars. They are so light (the 
Hiroki is a mere 452Kg [1] and the Armadillo-T is 3 Kg [2] lighter than that), they could easily 
be lifted and carried away by a small number of strong people with a minimal amount of 
equipment. 

So, we believe that as these new foldable electric cars start to come on the market, there will 
be a need for a security device that prevents unauthorized removal of the vehicle while 
allowing law enforcement to tow when necessary. It would also be desirable for the security 
system to warn the car owner in the case of the car being moved. However, any such alarm 
system cannot create a disturbance if the car is parked in a residential neighbourhood at 
night. Finally, if an electrical source or a source of energy transformable to electrical power is 
available, it would be an added benefit if the security system could also charge the car’s 
battery while the car is parked. In the case of this add-on, electromagnetic systems would be 
preferred. 

[1]   G. Munro (2013 Jan 2) “New for 2013-The Hiroko-The Foldable Car!” [Online] efergy  
Available: http://efergy.com/blog/new_for_2013-the_hiroko_the_foldable_car/#  

[2]   K. Munro (2013 Aug 13) “Armadillo-T Foldable Electric Micro-car by KAIST” [Online] de 
zeen magazine Available: http://www.dezeen.com/2013/08/23/armadillo-t-foldable-
electric-micro-car-by-kaist/  

[3]   A. MacKenzie (2013 Feb 18) “The Casple-Podadera City Car Knows When to Fold 'Em” 
[Online] Gizmag  Available: http://www.gizmag.com/casple-podadera-folding-car/26268/  

[4]  City of Toronto (2014 Aug 19) Chapter 200 Parking Space Regulations [Online] 

Available: 
http://www.toronto.ca/zoning/bylaw_amendments/ZBL_NewProvision_Chapter200.htm  

Page 17 of 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
APS111&113 Fall 2015 Final Exam - Answer Key to Multiple-Choice Questions

Question
MC1
MC2
MC3
MC4
MC5
MC6
MC7
MC8
MC9
MC10
MC11
MC12
MC13
MC14
MC15
MC16
MC17
MC18
MC19
MC20
MC21
MC22
MC23
MC24
MC25

Correct
Answer
C
B
D
A
B
B
B
C
C
C
D
A
B
D
D
C
A
B
D
A
C
B
C
C
D

MC26
MC27
MC28
MC29
MC30
MC31
MC32
MC33
MC34

C
C
C
C
A
A
B
C
B

After analyzing the results, the professors decided to make question #26 
bonus. Students who answered it correctly received a bonus mark. Students 
who answered incorrectly were not penalized. The multiple-choice portion of 
the exam was marked out of 33 instead of 34. It's possible to score 34/33.

APS111 2015 FINAL EXAM: CIs’ LONG ANSWER MARKING GUIDE 

In general, what we are looking for in questions 35, 36, 37: 

•  Understands key course concepts well enough to write intelligently about them: functions, objectives, research questions 
•  Paragraph level: Communicates using cohesive, unified, well-organized paragraphs with some sentence to sentence relationship 
•  Sentence level: Sentences are clear, concise, and any errors do not impede comprehensibility or significantly impeded ease of reading 

What we do NOT expect under exam–writing conditions: 

•  Research or research citations 
•  Metrics or goals 
•  Perfect grammar, super-polished writing 

Question 35.  

Based on Case Study 2: RFP for a Security System for Foldable Electric Cars, located in Appendix B, in paragraph form (one or more paragraphs) 
write a concise Problem Statement in your own words. DO NOT COPY SENTENCES WORD-FOR-WORD FROM THE CASE STUDY IN YOUR PROBLEM 
STATEMENT. YOU WILL RECEIVE NO MARKS FOR MATERIAL COPIED WORD-FOR-WORD FROM THE CASE STUDY. (20 marks) 

Fails (F) 9/20 and below 
Does not recognize the 
actual problem. 
Misidentifies problem. 

Lack of organization or 
structure in paragraphs.  

Criteria 
Content 

Organization & 
Presentation at 
sentence, 
paragraph & 
document level  

Below (C, D) 10-13/20 
Recognizes some of 
actual problem, but 
does not transform it to 
engineering terms. 
Some attempt at 
organization in 
paragraphs. 
Overreliance on 
“transition” words. 

Meets (B) 14-15/20 
Recognizes problem, 
transforms it into 
solution-independent 
engineering terms. 
Demonstrates deliberate 
& consistent logical 
development of material  

Exceed (A) >16/20 
Recognizes problem, identifies gap 
and transforms information 
entirely into solution independent 
engineering terms. 
Excellent paragraph organization in 
paragraphs: thoughtful topic 
sentence skilfully developed 
through both sentence order and 
use of transition words and 
conjunctions 

 
 
 
 
 
Sentences unrelated to one 
another 

or Inconsistent or 
inaccurate use of 
conjunctions/transition 
phrases  

Overuse/dependence on 
language of question, case 
study, or definitions 

Ideas are lost as a result of 
poor word choice or poor 
sentence structure 

Language of question 
and/or case study 
mixed with some 
personal language 

Ideas are 
comprehensible with 
effort; everyday 
vocabulary dominates 

Major and/or frequent 
syntax, usage, vocabulary 
or language form errors 

Somewhat free of 
syntax, usage, 
vocabulary or language 
form errors 

Satisfactory paragraph 
organization: clear 
relationship between 
topic sentences and 
organization of following 
sentences, careful choice 
of transition or linking 
strategies. 
Language of case study, 
questions used 
strategically and 
accurately with mostly 
personal language 
Meaning is clear at 
paragraph, sentence, and 
word choice level with 
minimal error  

Sentences are simple, 
direct; mostly accurate 
use of course terms, 
some repetition 

Mostly free of syntax, 
usage, vocabulary or 
language form errors 

Guides the reader with appropriate 
use of structure, presentation, & 
word choices  

Language of case study/questions 
integrated with student’s language 
as part of the discipline discourse 

Meaning presented in clear, 
elegant, and concise prose 
Combination of simple and 
complex sentences; concise; 
precise and accurate use of course 
terms 

Entirely free of syntax, usage, 
vocabulary or language form errors 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 36.  

Based on Case Study 2: RFP for a Security System for Foldable Electric Cars located in Appendix B, generate Functions, Objectives and 
Constraints. Utilize course tools such as Functional Basis and Functional Decomposition. In total, you should have about 10 items, whether they 
are Primary Functions, Secondary Functions, Unintended Functions, Objectives or Constraints. Treat this like a section of a design document with 
a section introduction and sub-sections. Introduce each of the sub-sections (e.g. Functions, Objectives, Constraints) with a few sentences that 
help the reader understand their nature and significance. (15 marks) 

Component 
Introductory sentences 

Fails (F) 7/15 and below 
Does not introduce lists or 
introduces lists in way 
that is not meaningful 

Below (C, D) 7.5-10/20 
Uses textbook definitions 

Functional basis 

Primary functions 

Secondary functions 

Objectives 

Constraints 

Does not provide 
Functional basis or 
provides incorrect 
functional basis 
Does not correctly identify 
primary function(s) 

Provides partial functional 
basis – e.g. uses verb 
“control” rather than 
specific kind of control 
Identifies one primary 
function 

Does not provide relevant 
secondary functions  
Objectives vague and/or 
meaningless 

Provides some relevant 
secondary functions 
Some meaningful 
objectives given 

Misses constraints in 
Client Statement 

Some constraints given 
but may be in terms of 
client statement 

Meets (B) 10.5-11.5/20 
Adapts textbook 
definitions to specific 
situation 

Provides one functional 
basis according to form 

Identifies two primary 
functions 

Provides a fairly complete 
list of secondary functions 
All objectives are 
reasonable, not 
necessarily measurable 
All constraints indicated in 
client statement are 
translated into 
engineering language 

Exceed (A) >12/15 
In addition to “meets” 
adds meaningful 
dimensions to 
introductory sentences 
Identifies two functional 
bases – one controlling 
mass, the other 
controlling information 
Identifies primary 
functions, in language 
that moves beyond 
functional bases 
Provides a comprehensive 
list of secondary functions 
Objectives may have goals 
added and seem to be 
measurable 
Constraints from problem 
statement, in engineering 
language, are augmented 
by reasonable other 
constraints (laws, codes) 

 
 
 
Question 37.  

Identify five key research questions you would want to answer in order to check the validity of your claims and to develop the three top 
objectives further. (Don’t worry about whether the questions are open or closed.) (5 marks) 

Like the PSQ assignment:  

• 
•  Can students recognize what they don't know that they need to know 
• 
I.e., Can they identify what additional information they need? 
•  Can they come up with some ideas on where/how to find it? 
•  Evaluate their ability to link questions with the claims they made in Q. 34 
•  To get full marks (5/5) only have to meet expectations, not exceed (exam) 

1-1.5 
Provides 1 Q. useful 
for 
validating/developing 
chosen objectives 

2-3 
Provides 1 or 2 questions 
useful for 
validating/developing the 
chosen objectives 

FAIL 0/5 
No answer 

Qs have no relationship 
to objectives discussed 

Questions already 
answered in case study 

FULL MARKS 4-5/5 
At least 3 questions 

All Qs. target info that 
would validate or 
develop the chosen 
objectives 

Each objective 
addressed by at least 
one question 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B: Case Study #2: RFP for a Security System for Foldable Electric Cars 

At the Toronto-based start-up, Vision 20/20 Inc., we are in the 
business of creating products for the future. As such, we are seeking 
proposals for a security device for electric folding cars. Three such 
automobile designs currently exist: 

-  The Hiroko developed by Massachusetts Institute of 

Technology (MIT) and a Spanish redevelopment agency, 
DENOKINN [1]; 

-  The Armadillo-T developed by the Korean Advanced 
Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) [2]; 

-  The Casple Podadera developed by the Spanish business 
group Casple and the designer Francisco Podadera [3]. 

Figure 1: Diagram of Hiroko Folding 
car, from G. Munro [1] 

Figure 2: Armadillo-T driving and folded configurations. From K. Munro [2] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Casple-Podadera driving and 
folded configurations. From A. 
MacKenzie [3] 

Measuring between 2.30 and 2.80 
metres in use and between 1.65 and 
1.90 metres when folded [1-3], these 
two person vehicles are the ultimate 
answer to the challenges of city 
driving and city parking! Up to three 
of these could fit in a conventional 

Toronto parking space (5.6*2.6 metres) [4]. So, how it works is, the driver finds a parking spot about a third of the size of a normal spot, gets out 
of the car, folds it and parks it through a smart phone app.  

However, at Vision 20/20, we foresee a major drawback for these cars. They are so light (the Hiroki is a mere 452Kg [1] and the Armadillo-T is 3 
Kg [2] lighter than that), they could easily be lifted and carried away by a small number of strong people with a minimal amount of equipment. 

So, we believe that as these new foldable electric cars start to come on the market, there will be a need for a security device that prevents 
unauthorized removal of the vehicle while allowing law enforcement to tow when necessary. It would also be desirable for the security system 
to warn the car owner in the case of the car being moved. However, any such alarm system cannot create a disturbance if the car is parked in a 
residential neighbourhood at night. Finally, if an electrical source or a source of energy transformable to electrical power is available, it would be 
an added benefit if the security system could also charge the car’s battery while the car is parked. In the case of this add-on, electromagnetic 
systems would be preferred. 

[1]   G. Munro (2013 Jan 2) “New for 2013-The Hiroko-The Foldable Car!” [Online] efergy  Available: http://efergy.com/blog/new_for_2013-the_hiroko_the_foldable_car/#  

[2]  

K. Munro (2013 Aug 13) “Armadillo-T Foldable Electric Micro-car by KAIST” [Online] de zeen magazine Available: http://www.dezeen.com/2013/08/23/armadillo-t-foldable-electric-micro-car-
by-kaist/  

[3]  

A. MacKenzie (2013 Feb 18) “The Casple-Podadera City Car Knows When to Fold 'Em” [Online] Gizmag  Available: http://www.gizmag.com/casple-podadera-folding-car/26268/  

[4]   City of Toronto (2014 Aug 19) Chapter 200 Parking Space Regulations [Online] Available: http://www.toronto.ca/zoning/bylaw_amendments/ZBL_NewProvision_Chapter200.htm  

APS11113 Fall 2015 Final Exam – Explanation of Questions with which Students had Difficulty 

5.  Which statement best describes bioaccumulation? 

a.  The entry of persistent toxic substances into the 

“Entry” does not describe accumulation 

Question 

Rationale 

environment. 

b.  The build-up of persistent toxic substances in the fatty 

“Build-up” = accumulation 

tissues of organisms. 

c.  The concentration in the tissues of an organism of 

substances occurring in the environment.  

8. 

d.  The increase in the concentration of a substance in the 

tissues of organisms at successively higher levels in a food 
chain. 

In Ontario law, good character comprises three components, 
including the courage to do what is right, no matter the personal 
consequences.  This component of the Ontario law is also 
referred to as which of the following? 
a.  Due diligence. 

b.  Code of Ethics. 

c.  Whistle-blower clause. 

d.  Professional Engineers Ontario. 

“Concentration” is a measure of the amount of 
contaminant at the time a sample is taken; it does not 
describe accumulation 
This is the definition of “bio-magnification” presented in 
the Economics 1 lecture; the key is the second part of 
the answer. 

Due diligence is defined as “taking reasonable care to 
ensure all relevant standards, codes, and statues are 
adhered to...”; it applies more to an approach to 
engineering work, rather than a behavior. 
The Code of Ethics is a guide to appropriate behavior 
that is embedded in the Professional Engineers Act and 
Regulations. 
“Whistle-blower” clause is described as the “courage to 
do what is right, no matter the personal consequences”, 
taken directly from the lecture (see Slide 18 in the 
November 27 lecture – I even use a large arrow to point 
it out). 
This is the organization that requires “good character”. 

 
 
Question 

Rationale 

11.  Which of the following statements about present worth is 

TRUE? 
a.  Present worth relies on simple interest calculations and a 

fixed interest rate. 

b.  Present worth is only used for private sector engineering 

design projects. 

c.  Present worth cannot be applied to external costs and 

benefits. 

Simple interest calculations and fixed interest rate can 
be used, but so can compound interest and variable 
interest rate.  Furthermore, in Economics 2 lecture, I 
explained that most engineering (and real world) time 
value of money calculations are based on compound 
interest – see Slide 12. 
Private sector projects do not have a monopoly on 
present worth; it can be used for public sector, and not-
for-profit sector, projects, too. 
Present worth can be applied to any type of costs and 
benefits. 

d.  Present worth is calculated by discounting future cash flows.  This is the definition directly from Economics 2 (see 

Slide 14). 

17.  Life cycle assessment is different from industrial ecology 

because: 
a.  Life cycle assessment ends with the final disposal of the 

product, whereas industrial ecology considers uses for the 
product after the end of the products service life.  

b.  Life cycle assessment has been applied to many different 

products and systems, but industrial ecology has only been 
applied at Kalundborg, Denmark. 

c.  Life cycle assessment applies to products and industrial 

ecology is restricted to large-scale industries. 

d.  Life cycle assessment identifies waste emissions, whereas 
industrial ecology identifies waste emissions as inputs to 
other industrial processes.  

This is a main difference between LCA and Industrial 
ecology:  LCA ends with final disposal, but with industrial 
ecology, “disposal is not the end” (see lecture on 
Sustainability, Slide 24). 
Incorrect because industrial ecology has been applied 
beyond Kalundborg. 

Incorrect because LCA can be applied to systems (as 
well as products) and industrial ecology is not restricted 
to large-scale industries. 
Both LCA and industrial ecology identify waste 
emissions (so this is not a difference), and there is 
nothing to stop an LCA from concluding that waste 
emissions could be used as an input to another process. 

 
 
Question 
26.  LEGO(cid:147) toy bricks are made in manufacturing facilities that incur 
a number of different types of costs.  Which one of the following 
statements about the costs of the toy bricks is TRUE? 
a.  The cost of the plastic used to the produce the toy bricks 

represents a fixed operating cost. 

b.  Rent and taxes paid for the manufacturing facility are 

variable costs. 

c.  The cost of advertising LEGO(cid:147) toy bricks is a direct cost. 

d.  Workers wages are an indirect cost. 

27.  As a design engineer, you have been asked by the Lego Group 
to investigate the possibility of implementing an industrial 
symbiosis (industrial ecology) as one of the criteria for 
evaluating different locations for the new sustainability centre.  
You know that many global companies have manufacturing 
facilities located in Billund, including Bang & Olufsen, Ecco, and 
CCI Europe. You agree to use the criterion, but you want to 
ensure the Lego Group fully understands the principles, so you 
explain that one of the following statements about industrial 
ecology is FALSE:  
a.  Most inputs should be obtained through recycling. 

b.  Industries should minimize the use of materials and energy. 

c.  Products should be designed so they have a finite service 

life. 

Rationale 

False because the amount of plastic depends on how 
many bricks are manufactured; the cost of plastic is a 
variable cost. 
False because rent and taxes must be paid on a regular 
basis (monthly, annually) no matter how many bricks are 
made or how many hours / days / months the 
manufacturing facility operates; these are fixed costs. 
The cost of advertising a product must be taken into 
consideration when determining the cost to the client. 
False, because as with advertising, worker’s wages are 
a direct cost of toy brick production. 

This statement is TRUE: “most inputs should be 
obtained through recycling” (Sustainability, Slide 28, #5). 
This statement is TRUE: “minimize the use of materials 
and energy” (Sustainability, Slide 28, #3). 
This statement is FALSE: a key principle is to design 
products to create other useful products at the end of the 
product’s originally-intended service life (Sustainability, 
Slide 28, #6). 

 
 
Question 
d.  Products and processes can produce residuals, but not 

This statement is TRUE (Sustainability, Slide 28, #1). 

Rationale 

wastes. 

28.  During the production of LEGO(cid:147) toy bricks, excess heat is 

released into the atmosphere as the heated plastic is injected 
into the moulds.  The Lego Group estimates the annual amount 
of waste heat is sufficient to meet the energy needs of 500 
households.  The Lego Group has hired you as the design 
engineer to build a system to capture the excess heat and 
convert it to electricity.  Which of the following terms best 
describes what you have been asked to do with the excess 
heat? 
a.  Reuse. 

b.  Reduce. 

c.  Recover. 

d.  Renewable. 

Reuse means there is “no essential change to the 
component in order for it to be utilized for a different 
purpose” (see Textbook definition, p. 594).  The question 
specifies that the design engineer is to “build a system to 
capture the excess hear and convert it to electricity” – if 
anything, this is an example of “recycling”. 
Reduce means to use less – but the question is about 
using excess heat; there is no mention of reducing heat 
generation.  
The question specifies that the design engineer is to 
“build a system to capture the excess heat and convert it 
to electricity”.  This is an example of waste heat 
“recovery”; related to the energy from waste example 
described in Environment  1.  
A manufacturing process is not considered a renewable 
energy source. 

 
Question 

Rationale 

31. What price should the Lego Group charge for the toy bricks so 

that the payback period is equal to the time between now and the 
opening of the new sustainability centre, assuming the number of 
toy bricks sold annually remains constant? 

a.  0.02¢ per toy brick. 
b.  0.03¢ per toy brick. 
c.  0.038¢ per toy brick. 
d.  0.0002¢ per toy brick. 

Let P = price per toy brick in $ 

See calculation below. 
Incorrect. 
Incorrect.  
The answer is $0.0002; this amount must be multiplied 
by 100 to obtain the amount in cents. 

Payback period = the time between now and the opening of the new sustainability centre = assume 15 years 

Number of toy bricks sold annually = assume to be # manufactured annually = 60 billion = 60 x 109/ year 

Cost for the new sustainability centre = $150 million = $150 x 106  

Payback period  

= 15 years = 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑓𝐶𝑓 𝐶ℎ𝑒 𝑛𝑒𝑛 𝐶𝑠𝐶𝐶𝑠𝑠𝑛𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝐶𝑠 𝑐𝑒𝑛𝐶𝑓𝑒

𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑅𝑒𝑅𝑛𝑠𝑒

Annual revenue 

= (Price per toy brick) x (Number of bricks sold annually) 

=  $𝑃
𝐵𝑓𝑠𝑐𝐵

 x 60,000,000,000 𝐵𝑓𝑠𝑐𝐵𝐶
𝑌𝑒𝑠𝑓

 = $60P x 109/ year 

Thus, payback period  

= 15 years = 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑓𝐶𝑓 𝐶ℎ𝑒 𝑛𝑒𝑛 𝐶𝑠𝐶𝐶𝑠𝑠𝑛𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝐶𝑠 𝑐𝑒𝑛𝐶𝑓𝑒

𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑅𝑒𝑅𝑛𝑠𝑒

 = 

$150,000,000

$60,000,000,000𝑃/𝑠𝑒𝑠𝑓

= (15 years) x ($60,000,000,000P/year) = $150,000,000 

= $900,000,000,000P = $150,000,000 

= P =  150,000,000
900,000,000,000

 = $0.000167 ≈ $0.0002 

There are 100¢ in $1, therefore multiply P x 100 to get the amount in cents = (100¢ / $) x $0.0002 = 0.02¢ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29.  The purpose of Q29 was to test the student’s understanding of the different methods to choose among alternatives.  The 
answer to Q29 is “c”, and the choices come from the chart on p. 151 of the text book, which lists different decision-making 
models, along with the descriptions of the models on the pages thereafter.   

The year is 2030, and you have been hired as a design engineer by the Lego Group to work at their sustainability centre. You 
have been experimenting with different materials that could be used instead of the fossil-fuel based plastic, and you have 
identified 3 potential substitutes: milk protein, polycaprolactone (PCL), and silica. The Lego Group has given you 3 objectives for 
the new sustainable material: (1) heat resistance up to 310°C, (2) compatibility with existing toy brick moulds, and (3) 
manufacturing costs using the new sustainable material not to exceed current costs. To compare how well the different materials 
satisfy the objectives, you propose to use a decision-making method. Which of the following statements best describes which 
method you will use and why? 

a. Multi-voting, because it is simple to use and provides a high degree of confidence. Per the chart on p. 151 of the textbook, 
multi-voting is simple to use but provides a low level of confidence, so the statement that multi-voting provides a high 
degree of confidence is incorrect. 

b. Graphic decision chart, because it can be used for more than 2 objectives. Per the description on p. 152  and the diagram 
on p. 153 of the textbook, a graphic decision chart is used to compare against 2 criteria, not more than 2 as is the case 
here with 3 objectives identified, so the statement that the method can be used for more than 2 objectives is not 
correct.  

c. Pugh Method, because it is simple to use and works best with only a few alternatives. The Pugh method is listed under the 
“Simple Models” on p. 154 of the textbook, and the description in the chart on p. 151 actually states that the Pugh 
Method “works best with only a few alternatives”, making this answer the best one of the  4 choices available. 

d. A risk-based model, because it is simple to use and captures the significant risks involved in changing the plastic used for the 
toy bricks. Per the chart on p. 151 of the textbook, risk-based models are identified as “very difficult” to use, and while 
this type of model will capture the risks, the first part of the answer is incorrect. 

 
 
