Engineering Strategies and Practice 

Syllabus 
Engineering  Strategies  and  Practice  (ESP)  is  a  foundational  design  course  sequence  that  uses 
the  engineering  design  process  as  a  context  for  developing  skills  essential  to  the  practice  of 
engineering:  

Figure 1: ESP Skills 

This two-course sequence – ESP I in the fall term and ESP II in the winter term - will  challenge 
you  to  design  engineering  solutions  for  your  client’s  everyday  problem.    You  will  learn  to 
problem solve with creativity, methodology and credibility. In conducting background research 
for your project you will practice independent learning skills. You will be required to take into 
account  factors  outside  of  the  technical  such  as  environmental,  societal,  ethical,  and  human 
factors and in doing so you will develop a systems thinking approach in your work. In reporting 
your  solution  you  will  make  use  of  effective  written,  oral,  and  graphical  professional 
communication.  Finally  you  will  achieve  all  of  this  while  working  efficiently  in  a  team.  These 
abilities will make you a better engineer. 

ESP I 

ESP I introduces the design process through a set of design projects. In your assigned team will 
select one of three projects to design an engineering solution for a fictitious client. This term 
you  will  not  have  direct  contact  with  your  client.  The  end  deliverable  for  the  first  half  of  the 
course  will  be  a  conceptual  design.  You  will  grapple  with  the  challenges  of  an  engineering 
design  problem  while  working  efficiently  in  a  team.  Writing  and  reading,  as  engineering 
activities, are introduced. You will learn how to identify and take into account frontline design 
factors such as economics, environment, society, and human factors.  

In  the  second  half  of  the  course,  you  will  participate  in  a  seminar.  In  small  groups  you  will 
discuss a topic unique to your seminar that in addition to engineering content requires broader 

1 

 
 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

considerations when making a professional recommendation. You will be assigned readings on 
the topic and required to express your opinion through an oral presentation.  

ESP II 

Now that you have experience with the engineering design process you will be assigned your 
own  unique  design  project,  completed  with  a  real  client.  You  will  learn  the  basics  of  project 
management, how to approach a complex problem and break it down into solvable parts, and 
how to acquire and use information in the design process. Working in a team with a real client, 
you will go through a complete design process to develop an initial workable solution to meet a 
client’s  need.  The  end  result  will  be  a  written  final  design  specification,  an  oral  presentation, 
and for teams that excel a prototype, proof-of-concept model, or simulation.  

Lectures 

Tuesday 9:10 – 10:00 am, Convocation Hall 

Thursday 9:10 – 10:00 am, Convocation Hall 

Friday 9:10 – 10:00 am, Convocation Hall 

Attendance at lectures is mandatory. The first lecture is on Thursday, September 5, 2013 – it is 
a  two-hour  plenary  lecture,  9:10am–11:00am  in  Convocation  Hall.  Any  classes  scheduled  for 
Thursday, September 5, 2013 from 10:10 am to 11:00am are cancelled for that one day. Regular 
one-hour  lectures  start  on  Friday,  September  6,  2013,  9:10am–10:00am  in  Convocation  Hall. 
Teaching  team  members  will  be  available  for  10  minutes  before  and  after  lecture  to  answer 
questions.  

Tutorials: Weeks 3 to 10 

Attendance at tutorials is mandatory. Check ROSI for the day, time and location of your tutorial. 
There is no tutorial in Week 1 (September 2-6) or Week 2 (September 9-13), however there is a 
tutorial  agenda  that  lists  things  you  are  expected  to  have  completed  before  your  Week  3 
tutorial. Tutorials start in Week 3 (September 16-20). On the Blackboard course portal, check 
the  course  schedule  for  details  about  tutorial  activities  and  the  tutorial  agendas  for  specific 
expected deliverable for each tutorial. 

Seminars: Weeks 11 to 13 

Attendance at seminars is mandatory. Seminars will be held during regular tutorial times, but in 
a  different  room  and  with  different  students  than  your  tutorials.  Information  about  your 
assigned  seminar  will  be  emailed  to  you  and  posted  on  Blackboard  closer  to  the  start  of 
seminars.  In  the  seminars  you  will  be  meeting  with  a  small  group  of  students  and  a  seminar 
leader  to  discuss  an  engineering-related  topic  that  requires  broader  considerations,  such  as 
economics, environmental, societal, and human factors. A set of assigned readings will form the 

2 

 
 
 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

basis of the discussion. You are expected to have completed those readings prior to attending 
your seminar. 

Textbooks 

Two  books  are  required  for  ESP  I.  You  are  responsible  for  readings  assigned  from  these  two 
books and any additional readings posted on Blackboard. Content from these readings will be 
tested on the midterm and final exam even if the material was not covered directly in lecture. It 
is  important to  keep up  with the  readings.  Consult  with the  course  schedule  for  the  assigned 
reading list. 

•  Designing  Engineers:  An  Introductory  Textbook  (S.  McCahan,  P.  Anderson,  M.  Kortschot,  P. 

Weiss, and K.Woodhouse ) 
This  textbook  is  a  pre-publication  version  of  a  design  textbook  being  written  by 
members of the ESP teaching team and other experts in the field. This textbook will not 
be  available  in hard  copy  and  instead  an  e-book  version  will  be  available  for  purchase 
for a nominal fee. Purchasing the textbook online requires a credit card. If you do not 
have access to a credit card then you can purchase an a redemption code from the U of 
T  Bookstore.  The  e-book  version  is  downloadable  to  a  single  computer  (PC  or  MAC). 
After  the  initial  download  the  book  is  available  offline.  The  book  file  is  only  viewable 
through the VitalSource viewing software, which can be downloaded from this link:  

http://www.vitalsource.com/index/wiley 

This  viewing  software  allows  for  highlighting  text  and  notations.  If  you  buy  a  new 
computer, you can contact VitalSource Technical Support who can help you move the e-
book to your new computer. Copy protection restricts you to printing 10 pages at a time 
or copying up to two pages at a time. Those who have purchased the e-book will also be 
able to access it via a browser from any computer with internet access. Finally there are 
free apps for both iOS and Android that allow mobile access to purchased books.  

To purchase the e-book online, please go to this direct link for the correct textbook:  

http://store.vitalsource.com/show/9781118843956 

If you go to the general Vital Source website and search for the e-book instead of using 
the  direct  link  above,  you  might  encounter  older  versions  of  the  e-book  that  are 
different  and  incomplete.  The  current  correct  version  of  the  e-book  is:    Designing 
Engineers: An Introductory E-Text by McCahan for $39.95 US E-ISBN: 9781118843956 

If  you  had  purchased  a  redemption  code  from  the  U  of  T  Bookstore,  please  note  that 
you  will  need  to  first  install  the  VitalSource  Bookshelf  software.    After  you  had 

3 

 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

successfully  installed  the  software,  do  the  following  to  redeem  and  download  the 
textbook: 

1.  Launch the VitalSource Bookshelf. 
2.  Under the “Help” menu (at top), select “activate new content.” 
3.  Login (or register if this is your first time) 
4.  Enter your redemption code. 
5.  Click “Redeem.” 
6.  Go to “All Titles. Select the title you just redeemed. 
7.  Click “Download” 

Once downloaded, your Wiley E-Text will appear in the VitalSource Bookshelf on your 
computer.  You can access your digital text anytime since an internet connection is not 
required. 

Note:  If you had purchased a redemption code from the Bookstore, it takes 24 hours 
from the time of purchase for the code to be activated.  You must wait for the 24 hours 
to pass before you can redeem your code on VitalSource. 

•  The Human Factor (Kim Vicente) 

This book is available for purchase in hardcopy from the U of T Bookstore, Engineering 
Store,  and  Discount  Textbooks.  The  same  book  has  been  used  for  years,  so  there  are 
likely  many  used  copies  available.  Additionally  an  e-book  version  is  available  for 
purchase  from  Amazon.ca  or  from  Chapters.ca  (Kobo  format.  There  are  free  .azw  and 
epub readers available for PC, Mac, iOS, and Android. 

Special Supplies 

Besides  your  textbooks  and  standard  stationary  there  are  some  special  supplies  required  for 
ESP. These are described below. 

Engineering Notebook 

You  must  document  your  progress  on  your  project.  Standard  practice  in  industry  is  to  use  a 
hardcover notebook. It is recommended you use a standard bound lab notebook such as a black 
or blue physics or chemistry lab book. The size, color, and/or page format (ruled or quad) does 
not matter. A loose-leaf binder or spiral bound notebook is not recommended. An example of a 
notebook is available here: 

http://bit.ly/engnotebook  

If  you  always  have  your  laptop  / tablet  with  you,  you  may  prefer  to  use  a  digital  solution  for 
your  engineering  documentation.  If  you  opt  for  this  you  should  have  some  organizational 
structure  such  as  OneNote,  Evernote,  Google  Docs,  etc.  You  should  also  have  a  means  of 
capturing sketches for inclusion in your documentation. This could be a stylus on a tablet or a 
cell phone camera with high enough resolution.  

4 

 
 
 
 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

Google Account 

Assignments  in  this  course  are  required  to  be  written  using  Google  Docs  (Google  Drive).  This 
requires you to have a Google account. A Google account is different from a Gmail account. If 
you already have a Google account using your Gmail address, please set your mail.utoronto.ca 
address as your alternate email address in your Google account, or sign up for another Google 
account with your mail.utoronto.ca address. If you don’t have a Google account, sign up free of 
charge using the link below. (Click on “I prefer to use my current email address” to set up an 
account using your mail.utoronto.ca address.) 

http://tinyurl.com/6s6vya 

Top Hat (TH) Account 

Your  Professional  Development  grade  requires  you  to  answer  in  lecture  course  concept 
questions using the TH system. You must be registered with Top Hat (http://www.tophat.com) 
to earn these marks. The registration fee has already been paid for you by the Faculty. Course 
instructors  will  ask  course  concept  questions  in  lecture  to  gauge  students’  understanding  of 
course material. As well, students may ask instructors questions via TH in lecture. See the Top 
Hat  Instructions  posted  on  Blackboard  for  more  information  on  registration.  See  the 
Professional Development grade section below for more details about the marking.  

SMS Text-Capable Cell Phone 

To participate in the in lecture course concept questions via Top Hat you will need an SMS text-
capable cellular phone. Currently, Convocation Hall does not have WiFi access for you to 
connect to TH on your laptop. Regular SMS text costs will apply. You can expect to send 
approximately 60-180 text messages in total for ESP I and ESP II. If you do not have an SMS text-
capable cellular phone, you may contact the ESP Office for assistance. 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

 Marking 

Evaluation 

% of final mark 

Design Project Assignments: 

35% 

   Problem Statement & Questions – 4% 
   Project Requirements – 6%  
   Conceptual Design Specification – 20% 
   Research Worksheets – 5% 

Engineering Notes 

Seminar Participation & Oral Presentation 

Professional Development  
(Lecture participation, Piazza participation, 
other activities as posted) 

5% 

5% 

5% 

20% 

30% 

Total  100% 

Midterm Exam 

Final Exam 

Exams 

The  midterm  exam  is  currently  scheduled  to  be  held  the  evening  of  Thursday  24-Oct-2013. 
Check Blackboard closer to that date to confirm the time and location of the exam. 

The final exam time and location will be announced closer to the end of the term. 

Both the midterm and the final exam are Type-A exams as defined in the Faculty Calendar. This 
means that no printed materials can be used as an aid during the tests. They are closed-book 
and  closed-notes.  Electronic  devices  (i.e.  calculators,  cellular  phones,  and  electronic 
dictionaries)  are  not  permitted  at  the  exams.  Translation  paper  dictionaries  are  allowed,  but 
only those without definitions. If you have any doubt about whether your translation dictionary 
is eligible, bring it to the ESP Office for approval. 

Professional Development (PD)  

Professional behaviour is a series of habits that you must start developing immediately. You will 
not be able to “switch on” professionalism once you graduate. It is just as important for you to 
project  a  professional  image  in  your  lectures  and  tutorials  as  it  is  in  client  meetings  and 
interviews.  A  portion  of  your  course  grade  will  be  allocated  based  on  indicators  of  your 
professional behaviour.  

The greatest input into this grade is your ability to attend and follow along in ESP lectures. In 
most  lectures  the  instructor  will  ask  multiple  course  concept  questions  through  the  Top  Hat 
system. If you answer those questions correctly you will earn marks towards your PD grade. At 

6 

 
 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

the end of the term your number of correct questions divided by the total number of questions 
asked  will  determine  your  grade.  For  example  if  there  were  100  questions  asked  throughout 
the term and you answered 64 of them correctly you would get 3.2 PD marks (64/100*5) out of 
5. 

NOTE:  To  answer  in  lecture  questions  you  must  be  physically  present.  Attempting  to  answer 
without being physically present is an academic offense.  

Throughout  the  term  there  will  be  opportunities  to  earn  “bonus  PD  points.”  These 
opportunities  may  simply  be  calculations  at  the  end  of  the  term  (I.E.  top  contributors  to  the 
Piazza Q&A’s) or specific activities that will be posted in Blackboard. To continue the example 
above,  if  you  attended a  professional networking  event  that  was  pre-endorsed  by the  course 
you might earn 2 PD bonus points and for being the top contributor of in-lecture questions you 
might earn 5 PD bonus points. This would change your grade to 3.6 (71/100*5).  

Your ability to collect PD marks will depend on registering for a TH account and having access to 
an SMS capable cell phone (see the Special Supplies section above and the Top Hat Instructions 
posted on Blackboard).  

Attribution Table 

For  all  team  assignments  an  attribution  table  must  be  completed  and  signed  by  all  team 
members.  The  attribution  table  must  be  reviewed  by  all  of  the  team  members  prior  to  the 
document debrief session to make sure that all members agree on the information given in the 
table. The information must be fair and accurate. 

If  the  table  indicates  a  substantial  discrepancy  in  contribution  (i.e.  a  large  difference  in  the 
contributions among the team members) then the marks assigned to individual team members 
may  be  reduced  to  reflect  this  discrepancy.  The  TA  will  give  an  overall  “team  mark”  on  the 
assignment.  The  TA  will  then  use  the  attribution  table,  the  document  revision  history,  team 
members engineering notes, and the assignment debrief meeting to ascertain the contribution 
of  each  member to  the development  of the  document.  If  the  TA determines  an  imbalance  in 
contribution,  he  or  she  will  decide  on  a  reduced  mark  for  the  under-contributing  team 
member(s).  These  marks  are  simply  lost.  They  are  NOT  redistributed  to  the  other  team 
members. This is because one of the learning objectives of these team assignments is to mange 
to work effectively in a team. Under-contributing team members mean that the team has failed 
to achieve this learning objective. 

Course Communication Mechanisms 

It  is  important  that  you  keep  in  contact  with  the  ESP  Teaching  Team.  These  lines  of 
communication are maintained in a number of different ways: 

Blackboard  

This  site  can be  accessed  through the  U  of T  portal.  Go to the  U  of T  homepage  and  click  on 
“Portal.” You will need your UTOR ID and password to login. 

7 

 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

The site is where we will post class announcements and all course documents and where you 
can  access  your  term  marks  as  they  become  available.  This  is  the  primary  mode  of  course 
communication  outside  of  lecture  and  tutorial.  It  is  expected  that  you  will  check  Blackboard 
frequently for information. 

Public Course Website 

The public ESP website (www.esp.engineering.utoronto.ca) is for the general public, such as ESP 
II clients, and not students. All student information will be found on Blackboard as mentioned 
above. 

Email 

Do  not  email  questions  on  course  content,  instead  post  the  question  on  Piazza  (see  below). 
Only in exceptional cases will course content questions be answered via email. 

If you do send an email to a member of the teaching team consider it a professional email. This 
means  that  you  must  adhere  to  the  Professional  Email  Style  Requirements  posted  on 
Blackboard. Failure to do so may result in no response to your email.  

Do not put an automatic forward on your U of T email. We have had difficulty in the past with 
Hotmail and other providers filtering out U of T originated messages. If your email provider has 
this compatibility problem with the U of T system, you will miss important course information. 
A  missed  email  will  not  be  considered  sufficient  justification  for  the  granting  of  petitions.  Be 
sure you are getting all the course notices. 

Piazza 

We  will  be  using  Piazza  for  class  discussion.  The  system  is  intended  help  you  get  answers  to 
your questions as fast and efficiently as possible. The tool allows you to post your question to 
all  your  peers  and  members  of  the  teaching  team.  We  can  then  collaboratively  answer  your 
question. If you are not satisfied with your peers answers you can keep the question unresolved 
and  a  member  of  the  teaching  team  will  either  answer  it  themselves  or  endorse  a  student’s 
answer.  

If you prefer you can use the tool to send a question privately to the teaching team.  

You are strongly encouraged to use this tool to ask your questions rather than email. Only in 
exceptional circumstances will a question be answered via email.  

You can enroll in our class Piazza page at: 

https://piazza.com/utoronto.ca/fall2013/aps111/home 

Later in the term exceptional contributions to the Piazza discussion may be rewarded 

with PD bonus points. 

8 

 
 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

Twitter 

Prof.  Bazylak  will  be  relaying 
important  ESP  announcements  on  his  twitter  account 
“@ProfBazylak”  using  the  hashtags  #APS111  and  #APS112.  This  service  is  done  as  a  courtesy 
and you should still check Blackboard frequently. Students in APS113 should use the hashtags 
#APS111 in the Fall and #APS112 in the Winter. 

Cheating and Plagiarism 

This  course  has  both  team  and  individual  assignments.  Check  the  instruction  sheet  for  each 
assignment  to  identify  whether  it  is  an  individual  assignment  or  a  team  assignment.  When 
working  collaboratively  with  other  members  of  the  class,  as  with  all  professional 
communication, reports must bear all of the names of all the people who contributed to them, 
and acknowledge their contribution. It is considered plagiarism to submit a paper solely under 
your own name (i.e. take credit for it) if the content was written all or in part by someone else. 
While  it  is  acceptable  to  re-use  your  own  material  in  the  iterative  process  within  a  given 
project, it is considered plagiarism to re-use your own material for another project. If you are 
ever in doubt whether something constitutes plagiarism ask a member of the teaching team. 

When submitting assignments that are to be written individually, you must never copy even a 
portion of another student’s paper, or let another student copy yours. Failure to adhere to this 
rule is considered to be cheating – by both parties involved. Do not allow another student to 
borrow a draft of your assignment and do not leave a copy of your assignment where others 
may  use  it.  The  University  takes  cheating  of  any  kind  very  seriously.  Possible  penalties  for 
cheating  include  a  negative  mark  on  an  assignment,  zero  in  the  course,  annotations  on  your 
transcript, or even expulsion from the University. It is simply not a risk worth taking, no matter 
how desperate you may feel. It is far better to submit a substandard assignment than take the 
chance of incurring the kinds of academic penalties that the University will impose. For more 
information  on  the  definition  of  academic  and  non-academic  offences,  procedures  and 
penalties, please review the University of Toronto Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
Calendar. 

If  your  workload  is  such  that  you  are  feeling  totally  overwhelmed,  please  talk  to  the  Course 
Coordinator,  the  Course  Administrator,  First-Year  Counsellor, or the  Academic  Success  Centre 
(Koffler Centre). There are programs to assist you in learning how to cope with the University 
workload. 

In  this  course  you  will  be  submitting  your  assignments  to  Turnitin.com,  a  software  package 
licensed by the University of Toronto that is designed to detect plagiarism. Students agree that 
by  taking  this  course,  all  required  papers  will  be  subject  to  submission  for  textual  similarity 
review  to  Turnitin.com  for  detection  of  plagiarism.  All  submitted  papers  will  be  included  as 
source documents in the Turnitin.com reference database solely for the purpose of detecting 
plagiarism  of  such  papers.  The  terms  that  apply  to  the  University’s  use  of  the  Turnitin.com 
service are described on the Turnitin.com website. 

Submitting  a  document  to  Turnitin  that  is  different  than  the  version  you  submit  for  grade 
evaluation is an academic offense. 

9 

 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

Sharing Work outside Your Team 

Giving  another  team  access  to  documents  that  you  or  your  team  has  created  constitutes 
academic offence (cheating):  

•  Because you are enabling plagiarism to occur;  

•  Because  for  team  written  documents  you,  individually,  do  not  have  sole  ownership  of 
the  intellectual  property  (ideas  and  words)  contained  in  the  team  document.  It  is 
unethical  and  illegal  to  give  away  intellectual  property  that  does  not  belong  to  you 
without the permission of the owner, in this case the whole team. 

Sharing Work within Your Team 

Assignment feedback from a member of the teaching team belongs to the entire team. It is not 
acceptable  for  a  member  of  the  team  to  refuse  to  share  this  feedback.  Also,  it  is  the 
responsibility  of  each  team  member  to  make  available  to  their  team-mates  the  written  work 
they  have  prepared  for  the  shared  project.  This  includes  meeting  minutes,  notes  from  client 
interviews,  drafts  of  reports,  etc.  Withholding  work  that  pertains  to  the  team  project,  or 
feedback,  from  your  team-mates  is  considered  academic  dishonesty  and  demonstrates  poor 
team skills.  

If you are frustrated by the dynamics within your team, and/or your team-mates’ behaviour, it 
is important to address this in an appropriate and effective way. Your TA and CI can help you 
resolve these issues and help you, as a team, develop strategies for working successfully with 
each  other.  Remember:  most  projects  do  NOT  fail  for  technical  reasons  they  fail  because  of 
planning and team problems. 

Late Assignments, Missed Activities and Requests for Re-Marks 

This course will give you an idea of the professional environment you will likely be working in 
when you join the workforce. As such we have strict policies in place to govern adherence to 
deadlines and re-marking of deliverables (i.e. assignments). 

Late Assignments and Missed Activities 

Deadlines for course assignments are strictly enforced. Extra time to work on an assignment is 
not fair to others in the class who have not had the same opportunity. 

For each portion of 24 hour period past the deadline there is a 10-mark (out of 100) penalty on 
that  assignment.  Late  assignments  will  not  be  accepted  beyond  72  hours  past  the  deadline. 
After that point, a grade of “zero” will be assigned and the assignment will not be evaluated. 
The weekend counts toward these penalties. 

Example:  If  the  deadline  is  Wed  Sep  18  at  12:10pm  and  you  submit  your 
assignment on Fri Sep 20 at 12:11pm, your assignment will be accepted but with 
a  30-mark  penalty.  If  you  try  to  submit  your  assignment  on  Sat  Sep  21  at 
12:11pm, it will NOT be accepted and you will receive zero on the assignment. 

10 

 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

An  assignment  is  only  considered  submitted  once  ALL  components,  as  per  the  assignment 
instructions,  of  the  assignment  are  submitted.  An  assignment  with  an  incomplete  submission 
will continue to accrue late penalties until the additional components are submitted or the 72 
hour maximum late period passes. 

Late penalties for team assignments apply to the entire team regardless of who was responsible 
for  submitting  the  document.  You  are  expected  to  have  a  team  process  in  place  so  that  all 
members of the team can verify that the assignment has been submitted. 

If you have a reason for a late assignment, missed midterm exam or missed seminar, etc. (other 
than a missed final exam), you must submit a Petition for Consideration in Course Work with 
supporting documentation to the ESP Office within a week of returning to class from illness, or 
a  week  from  the  assignment  deadline.  (Petitions  for  final  exams  are  submitted  through  the 
Registrar’s Office Engineering Portal:  http://uoft.me/apscportal) 

If you know in advance that you will miss a deadline for a mandatory course activity, such as an 
assignment,  midterm  exam  or  seminar,  you  must  submit  the  petition  before  the  date  of  the 
activity.  In  addition,  you  must  apply  before  the deadline  or  activity  to  determine  if there  is  a 
possibility for you to make up the work, or if an extension can be granted. Note: a petition does 
not excuse you from work. 

If you are missing mandatory course activity due to religious observances, you must submit a 
petition to the ESP office at least three weeks before the date of the activity. The three-weeks 
advance notice is in accordance with the University of Toronto’s policy on Accommodations for 
Religious Observances as students would normally be aware of upcoming religious observances 
and course activities in advance. 

Course work petitions for ESP are submitted as follows: 

•  Fill out the Petition for Consideration in Course Work – Fillable PDF form posted in the 

Course Documents folder on the Blackboard course portal. 
•  Email the completed petition form to ESP:  esp@ecf.utoronto.ca 
• 

Include supporting documentation as applicable: 

o  Absence due to: 

 

Illness:    Email  to  ESP  a  completed  petition  form,  and  bring  to  the  ESP 
Office 
form 
(http://www.illnessverification.utoronto.ca/)  signed  by  a  registered 
medical physician. 

a  Verification 

in  GB149 

Student 

Illness 

of 

  Participation  in  athletic  or  other  types  of  competition:    Email  to  ESP  a 
completed petition form, and bring to the ESP Office in GB149 an official 
letter from the coach. 

o  Other  types  of  supporting  documentation  may  be  submitted  to  ESP  by  email 

(esp@ecf.utoronto.ca) or in the office (GB149) as appropriate. 

11 

 
 
 
Engineering Strategies and Practice 

Re-marking of Assignments 

Requests for a remark due to an error in the grading will be heard by one of the course 
coordinators within one week of the return of an assignment to all tutorial sections. Students 
may request a 10-minute meeting in person at the ESP Office to give evidence of the error and 
to explain the problem. Potential errors could include:  

•  TA misinterpreted a course concept 
•  Disagreement between the rubric and the comments on the document 

In the week of the return of an assignment, if there is an error in the marking, go to the ESP 
Office in GB149 to sign up for a meeting slot.  Prior to the meeting, share your Google Docs 
assignment file with esp@ecf.utoronto.ca (give us the “can edit” access to look at your revision 
history). Bring to the meeting the assignment’s marked rubric; a note with your name, student 
number (and team mates’ names and numbers if applicable) and brief descriptions of the 
marking errors; and any other supporting documentation/evidence to make your case. 

The results of the meeting will be provided to you by email. The results are final. Your grade 
may be raised OR lowered as a result of the remark request. For team assignments only one 
member of the team must attend, but all team members must have signed a letter indicating 
their desire to have a remark done.  

 Re-marking of Midterm Exam 

If, after seeing your grade and the midterm exam solutions posted on Blackboard, you feel that 
there has been an error in your mark: 1) First, request a copy of your midterm exam by emailing 
esp@ecf.utoronto.ca. 2) Check your copy against the solutions. 3) If you feel there is an error, 
you  may  request  a  remark  by  booking  a  10-minute  meeting  with  one  of  the  course 
coordinators. This booking must be done in person at the ESP Office and completed within one 
week of the grades being posted. You cannot book the meeting via email. At the meeting you 
are to give evidence of the error and to explain the problem. 

The results of the meeting will be provided to you by email. The results are final. Your grade 
may be raised OR lowered as a result of the remark request. 

Re-marking of Final Exam 

If  you  feel  there  has  been  an  error  in  the  marking  of  your  final  exam  you  may  request  a  re-
check through the Registrar’s Office Engineering Portal:  http://uoft.me/apscportal 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
