Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering - Engineering First Year Office 

APS100H1 F 
Orientation to Engineering   

Fall 2025 Syllabus 

Course Meetings 

Section 
LEC0101 

Day & Time 
Thursday, 11:00 AM - 12:00 PM 

Delivery Mode & Location 
In Person: ES 1050 

LEC0102 

Friday, 1:00 PM - 2:00 PM 

In Person: MS 2158 

LEC0103 

Friday, 12:00 PM - 1:00 PM 

In Person: MS 2158 

Refer to ACORN for the most up-to-date information about the location of the course meetings. 

LECTURES  

Weekly lectures are 50 minutes in length and begin at 10-minutes past the hour (e.g., for a class 
scheduled at 10:00 am, lecture will begin at 10:10 am). This is referred to as “UofT-time” and is 
allocated to enable students to relocate from class-to-class. Students are responsible for all 
material covered in, and associated with, lecture. Lecture recordings will be posted each week 
after the final Friday lecture section. 

Lectures begin the week of September 2, 2025. 

TUTORIALS  

Weekly tutorials are 50 minutes in length. Tutorials are facilitated by upper-year undergraduate 
teaching assistant (TA) mentors who will help guide you through the course material and 
exercises and provide you with support throughout your first-year fall term experience. Students 
are expected to attend and actively participate in all scheduled tutorials throughout the term; 
attending any tutorial section other than indicated in your course schedule will result in a 
participation grade of zero for that week.  

Tutorials begin the week of September 8, 2025 (the first full week of class). 

Course Contacts 

Course Website: https://q.utoronto.ca/courses/410820 
Coordinator & Instructor: Professor Dawn Kilkenny 
Tutorial Coordinators: Leslie Grife & Hannah Bild-Enkin 
Course Discussion Board: Piazza discussion board (linked in the Quercus course site) 
Additional Notes: For questions related to the course content or assignments, check the 
course syllabus, and Quercus. Post to Piazza if you still have questions.  

APS100H1 F Syllabus – Valid as of 2025-08-20 

Page 1 

 
 
 
 
 
Course Queries Email: aps100@engineering.utoronto.ca 

Additional Notes: If you cannot find an answer to your question on Piazza, or it is more 
personal in nature, please email the instructional team using the course email. Please allow 
up to 3 business days (Mon – Fri) to receive a response. Ensure your email has a professional 
tone and includes your full name and student number for reference. You may not receive a 
response if the answer is already available to you (e.g., in the syllabus, course 
announcement, etc).  

Course Overview 

Designed to help students transition into first-year engineering studies, and to develop and 
apply a greater understanding of the post-secondary academic learning environment, the field of 
engineering, application of mathematics and sciences in an engineering context, and properly 
frame engineering (education) as a socio-technical, people-centred endeavor. Topics include 
techniques for effective learning, time management, problem solving, successful teamwork, 
effective communications, test and exam preparation, stress management and wellness, 
engineering ethics and professionalism, academic integrity and the Student Code of Conduct, 
applications of math and science in engineering undergraduate research, extra- and co-
curricular involvement, and engineering disciplines and career opportunities. 

Course Learning Outcomes 

By the end of this course, students will have developed competency with: 

i) Time management skills 

ii) Understanding ethics in Engineering 

iii) Professionalism within Engineering 

iv) Resume building 

Prerequisites: None   
Recommended Preparation: None 

Credit Value: 0.25 

Corequisites: None   

Exclusions: None 

Measured Graduate Attributes [Introduced]: 

•  12A. Life-Long Learning: Demonstrate the ability to independently summarize, analyze, 

synthesize and evaluate information from a wide variety of sources (learning 
independently).  

•  2A. Problem Analysis: Demonstrate the ability to identify and characterize an engineering 

problem.  

•  2B. Problem Analysis: Demonstrate the ability to formulate a solution plan (methodology) 

for an engineering problem.  

•  10A. Ethics and Equity: Demonstrate the ability to recognize ethical and equity based 

dilemma.  

•  10B. Ethics and Equity: Demonstrate the ability to apply the Code of Ethics and equity 

principle  

APS100H1 F Syllabus – Valid as of 2025-08-20 

Page 2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marking Scheme 

Assessment 

Percent  Details 

Due Date 

Tutorial Participation 

20% 

Student engagement in weekly 
tutorial will be assessed. There are 
10 scheduled tutorial sessions but 
only the top 9 assessments will be 
included in the final Tutorial 
Participation grade (the lowest tutorial 
assessment will be dropped). 

Weekly 

Welcome Survey 

2% 

For completion by the required due 
date. 

September 10, 
2025 

Syllabus Quiz 

Academic Integrity 
Modules 

Time Management 
Assignment (Part I) 

Time Management 
Assignment (Part II) 

Minerva Ethics 
Module 

Engineering Ethics 
Assignment 

Engineering Resume 
Assignment 

2% 

2% 

10% 

10% 

2% 

20% 

10% 

September 10, 
2025 

September 10, 
2025 

September 13, 
2025 

September 27, 
2025 

For completion by the required due 
date. 

October 1, 2025 

October 18, 2025 

November 22, 
2025 

Course Exit Survey 

2% 

For completion by the required due 
date. 

November 26, 
2025 

Final Test 

20% 

The Final Test is mandatory; this 
means you cannot pass this course if 
you do not write this test. The test is 
summative, and you will be 
responsible for all content shared in 
lecture and tutorial.  

Tentatively 
scheduled for 
Dec. 2nd, 2025. 

APS100H1 F Syllabus – Valid as of 2025-08-20 

Page 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final course grades will be based on the following system: 

80% - 100% = High Pass (H) 

60% - 79% = Pass (P) 

0% - 59% = Fail (FL) 

NOTE: Non-numeric course grades (like your grade for APS100) do not count towards your 
sessional average or grade point average (GPA). However, you are required to achieve at least 
a Pass (P) in this course in order to graduate. For more information about term grade 
requirements, please refer to the Promotion Regulations in the Academic Calendar.  

Late Assessment Submissions Policy 

All assignments are due no later than 9:00 PM ET on the indicated due date. Late submissions 
without a valid petition are subject to a 20% penalty per day.  

Petitions   

Sometimes, things don't go as planned. A petition is your formal request for an exception to a 
Faculty or University rule, regulation, or deadline. A student who is unavoidably absent during 
the term and consequently misses any graded work should submit a term-work petition through 
the Engineering Portal within 7 days of the deadline of the graded work. The petition must be 
accompanied by appropriate documentation.   

You can find more information about petitions in Section XII: Petitions and Appeals in the 
Academic Regulations chapter of the Academic Calendar, and in the Faculty’s ‘Current 
Engineering Undergraduates’ website.    

Policies & Statements 

University Land Acknowledgement 

I wish to acknowledge this land on which the University of Toronto operates. For thousands of 
years, it has been the traditional land of the Huron-Wendat, the Seneca, and the Mississaugas 
of the Credit. Today, this meeting place is still the home to many Indigenous people from across 
Turtle Island and we are grateful to have the opportunity to work on this land. 

Learn more about Canada’s relationship with Indigenous Peoples here. 

Indigenous Students’ Supports 

If you are an Indigenous engineering student, you are invited to join a private Discord channel to 
meet other Indigenous students, professors, and staff, chat about scholarships, awards, work 
opportunities, Indigenous-related events, and receive mentorship. Email Professor Bazylak if 
you are interested. 

Indigenous students at U of T are also invited to visit Nations House’s (FNH) Indigenous 
Student Services for culturally relevant programs and services. If you want more information on 
how to apply for Indigenous specific funding opportunities, cultural programs, traditional 
medicines, academic support, monthly social events or receive the weekly newsletter, go to the 

APS100H1 F Syllabus – Valid as of 2025-08-20 

Page 4 

 
 
 
 
 
FNH website, email or follow FNH on social media: Instagram, or TikTok. A full event calendar 
is on the CLNX platform. Check CLNX often to see what new events are added!  

Wellness and Mental Health Support 

Your personal wellness and mental health are important. The University of Toronto and the 
Faculty of Applied Science & Engineering offer a wide range of free and confidential services 
that can support your well-being.  

As a U of T Engineering student, you have a Departmental Undergraduate Advisor or a 
Departmental Graduate Administrator who can support you by advising on personal matters that 
impact your academics. You can reach out to your Academic Advisor if you have questions 
about academic regulations, if you’re concerned about how something in your life might impact 
your academics, or if you would like help connecting to other resources on campus. Other 
resources that you may find helpful are listed on the U of T Engineering Mental Health & 
Wellness webpage, and a small selection are also included here: 

•  U of T Engineering’s Student & Community Wellness Coordinator  
•  Health & Wellness and the On-Location Engineering Wellness Counsellor  
•  Health & Wellness Peer Support Program  
•  Accessibility Services & the On-Location Advisor  
•  Graduate Engineering Council of Students’ Mental Wellness Commission  
•  SKULE™ Mental Wellness  
•  U of T Engineering’s Learning Strategist and Centre for Learning Strategy Support  
•  Registrar’s Office and Scholarships & Financial Aid Office & Advisor  

We encourage you to access these resources as soon as you feel you need support; no issue is 
too small. You may reach out to the counsellors at U of T Telus Health Student Support for 24/7 
free and confidential counselling support.  

If you find yourself feeling distressed and in need of more immediate support visit 
uoft.me/feelingdistressed or U of T Engineering’s Urgent Support – Talk to Someone Right Now.  

Accommodations 

The University of Toronto supports accommodations for students with diverse learning needs, 
which may be associated with mental health conditions, learning disabilities, autism spectrum, 
ADHD, mobility impairments, functional/fine motor impairments, concussion or head injury, 
visual impairments, chronic health conditions, addictions, D/deaf, deafened or hard of hearing, 
communication disorders and/or temporary disabilities, such as fractures and severe sprains, or 
recovery from an operation.  

If you have a learning need requiring an accommodation the University of Toronto recommends 
that students register with Accessibility Services as soon as possible.  

We know that many students may be hesitant to reach out to Accessibility Services for 
accommodations. The process of accommodation is private; we will not share details of your 
APS100H1 F Syllabus – Valid as of 2025-08-20 

Page 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
needs or condition with any instructor.  

If you feel hesitant to register with us, we encourage you to reach out for further information and 
resources on how we can support. It may feel difficult to ask for help, but it can make all the 
difference during your time here.  

Phone: 416-978-8060  
Email: accessibility.services@utoronto.ca  

Equity, Diversity and Inclusion 

Looking for community? Feeling isolated? Not being understood or heard? 

You are not alone. You can talk to anyone in the Faculty that you feel comfortable 
approaching, anytime – professors, instructors, teaching assistants, first-year or upper years 
academic advisors, student leaders or the Assistant Dean of Diversity, Inclusion and 
Professionalism. 

You belong here. In this class, the participation and perspectives of everyone is invited and 
encouraged. The broad range of identities and the intersections of those identities are valued 
and create an inclusive team environment that will help you achieve academic success. You 
can read the evidence for this approach here. 

You have rights. The University Code of Student Conduct and the Ontario Human Rights Code 
protect you against all forms of harassment or discrimination, including but not limited to acts of 
racism, sexism, Islamophobia, antisemitism, homophobia, transphobia, ableism, classism and 
ageism. Engineering denounces unprofessionalism or intolerance in language, actions or 
interactions, in person or online, on- or off-campus. Engineering takes these concerns extremely 
seriously and you can confidentially disclose directly to the Assistant Dean for help here. 

Resource List: 

•  Engineering Equity, Diversity & Inclusion Groups, Initiatives & Student Resources 
•  Engineering Positive Space Resources 
•  Request a religious-based accommodation here 
•  Email Marisa Sterling, P.Eng, the Assistant Dean, Diversity, Inclusion & Professionalism 

here 

•  Make a confidential disclosure of harassment, discrimination or unprofessionalism here 

or email engineering@utoronto.ca or call 416.946.3986 

•  Email the Engineering Society Equity & Inclusivity Director here 
•  U of T Equity Offices & First Nations House Resources 

Plagiarism Detection Tool 

Normally, students will be required to submit their course essays to the University's plagiarism 
detection tool for a review of textual similarity and detection of possible plagiarism. In doing so, 
students will allow their essays to be included as source documents in the tool's reference 

APS100H1 F Syllabus – Valid as of 2025-08-20 

Page 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
database, where they will be used solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism. The terms that 
apply to the University's use of this tool are described on the Centre for Teaching Support & 
Innovation web site ( https://uoft.me/pdt-faq). 

Quercus Information 

This course uses the University's learning management system, Quercus, to post information 
about the course. This includes posting readings and other materials required to complete class 
activities and course assignments, as well as sharing important announcements and updates. 
The site is dynamic and new information and resources will be posted regularly as we move 
through the term, so please make it a habit to log in to the site on a regular, even daily, basis. 
To access the course website, go to the U of T Quercus log-in page at https://q.utoronto.ca. 
Once you have logged in to Quercus using your UTORid and password, you should see the link 
or "card" for this course. You may need to scroll through other cards to find this. Click on this 
link to open our course area, view the latest announcements and access your course resources. 
There are Quercus help guides for students that you can access by clicking on the "?" icon in 
the left side column. 

SPECIAL NOTE ABOUT GRADES POSTED ONLINE: Please also note that any grades posted 
are for your information only, so you can view and track your progress through the course. No 
grades are considered official, including any posted in Quercus at any point in the term, until 
they have been formally approved and posted on ACORN at the end of the course. Please 
contact aps100@engineering.utoronto.ca as soon as possible if you think there is an error in 
any grade posted on Quercus.  

Use of Generative Artificial Intelligence Tools 

In APS100, students may use artificial intelligence tools for creating an outline for an 
assignment, but the final submitted assignment must be original work produced only by the 
individual student. Students may also use artificial intelligence tools for critiquing and editing an 
assignment for purposes of revision, but the first draft must be original work produced by the 
individual student alone.  

New ideas introduced by the AI during the critique or editing process must be appropriately cited 
as generated by the AI tool.  

Students may not use artificial intelligence tools for taking tests, writing research papers, 
creating computer code, or completing major course assignments.  However, these tools may 
be useful when gathering information from across sources and assimilating it for understanding.  

Academic Integrity 

All students, faculty and staff are expected to follow the University's guidelines and policies on 
academic integrity. For students, this means following the standards of academic honesty when 
writing assignments, collaborating with fellow students, and writing tests and exams. Ensure 
that the work you submit for grading represents your own honest efforts. Plagiarism—
representing someone else's work as your own or submitting work that you have previously 
submitted for marks in another class or program—is a serious offence that can result in 
APS100H1 F Syllabus – Valid as of 2025-08-20 

Page 7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
sanctions. Please contact aps100@engineering.utoronto.ca for advice on anything that you find 
unclear. To learn more about how to cite and use source material appropriately and for other 
writing support, see the U of T writing support website. Consult the Code of Behaviour on 
Academic Matters for a complete outline of the University's policy and expectations. For more 
information, please see the U of T Academic Integrity website. 

APS100H1 F Syllabus – Valid as of 2025-08-20 

Page 8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
