University of Toronto 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
APSI11T Engineering Strategies and Practice 
Course Instructor: Jason Bazylak 
Communication Instructor: Maria Cioni 
Final Examination 
Apr 16, 2018 
9:30 am to 12:00 pm (2.5 hours) 

Student Name: 

UTor Email: 

Please print clearly 

Final Examination Instructions 
Ensure that you have all 10 pages of this Final exam and the separate one-page 
Final Exam RFP. 
There are 70 marks in total on this exam. 
You have 2.5 hours to complete this exam. 
Write your name and Ulor Email address on this booklet. 
Read each question carefully. All questions should be answered directly in this 
booklet in the box provided. 
If you need scrap paper for draft work, ask an invigilator. 
Write in complete sentences and complete paragraphs were applicable. 
Marks for each question are indicated in square brackets []. 
This is a Type A Closed book examination; no aids permitted. You are allowed a 
paper translation-only dictionary (no definitions). 
Where needed draw upon your own engineering expertise. You will not be required 
to have references as you normally would. 
At the end of the exam hand in this booklet. You do not need to hand in the RFP. 
Circle the number "1." at the start of Question 1 on page 2 for a bonus mark. 

Page 1of 10 

1. Circle T (TRUE) or F (False) for each statement below. If the answer is FALSE, then 
rewrite the entire statement to make the statement TRUE. There may be multiple 
ways to do this, just pick one. [1 Mark each; total 9 Marks] 

[T or F]: The purpose of an engineering argument is to market. 

[T or F]: The purpose of the Project Report (PR) is to define the solution. 

[1 or F]: The purpose of the Measures of Success is to persuade the client that 
your recommended design is the right design for them. 

[T or F]: Idea selection defines the client's need by specifying the boundaries of the 
design problem. 

[T or F]: The purpose of prototyping the design is to test the success of a design. 

[T or F]: A constraint goal is the metric that the design tries to meet. 

[1 or F]: Considering the most-to-least way to prevent negative environmental 
impact, an engineering designer would: Reuse, Reduce, Recycle. 

[T or F]: In the Toulmin Model of Argument, the problem is called the warrant. 

[1 or F]: Life cycle costing is a tool to visualize potential environmental impacts. 

Page 2 of 10 

Questions 2 to 14 pertain to the Request for Proposal (RFP) - Wireless Batten' 
Recharging in a Factory 

2. Identify the functionality of the problem using the three steps below (2.a to 2.c) 

a. Write a Gap for the problem. [2 Marks] 

Write a Functional Basis for the problem. It must be linked to the Gap in Question 
2.a. Use the verbs discussed in lecture and listed below and no additional 
qualifiers. [1 Marks] 

Write one Primary Function for the problem. It must be linked to the Functional 
Basis in Question 2.b. Use the verbs discussed in lecture and listed below and no 
additional qualifiers. [1 Marks] 

Page 3 of 10 

3. Write a Problem Statement for the RFP. [6 Marks] 

4. Write two Constraints complete with metric (limit is not needed). [4 Marks] 

Page 4 of 10 

5. Write three Objectives complete with metric (goal is not needed). List them in order of 

importance and give evidence of this ranking. [9 Marks] 

Identify one key Stakeholder on whom the design will have significant impact. 
Describe the impact. Do not use the client, user or design team. [2 Marks] 

Identify one specific aspect of the Service Environment. [1 Mark] 

Page 5 of 10 

8. Using two different idea generation methods, other than Brainstorming/Enumeration, 
generate and describe two feasible design alternatives. Identify which method was 
used for each design and why was it used. The more innovative and distinctly different 
the approach of the design alternatives, the more marks you will receive. [9 Marks] 

Page 6 of 10 

9. Using the three Objectives generated above and a Weighted Decision Matrix, make a 
recommendation for one of your alternative designs. This recommendation must use 
the SEE structure for a credible argument as discussed in class. [6 Marks] 

Page 7 of 10 

For one Objective above, give a bulleted plan for measuring the success of this 
objective. Identify what type of measure of success it is. [2 Marks] 

Draw a basic Life Cycle Diagram for your recommended design. [6 Marks] 

Page 8 of 10 

12.Assume your recommended design (design 1) and the runner up design (design 2) 
have the costs listed in Table 1. If the devices being charged need 300 kWh of 
electricity per day and the price of electricity is $0.10 I kWh, what is the payback 
period for Design 2 (in days or years)? [5 Marks] 

Table 1: Design cost comparison 

Implementation Cost 

Power Transmission
Efficiency 

Maintenance 

Costs 

Design 1 

Design 2 

$l 0k 

$25k 

60% 

75% 

$5k 

$5k 

13. If you were presenting the results from Question 12 to the client in an oral 
presentation, what would be an effective header on the slide? [1 Mark] 

Page 9 of 10 

14. If you were tasked with this REP, you would need to do research. Give three 

examples of research questions/areas you need to investigate and the type of source 
that would provide credible information. [6 Marks] 

Page 10 of 10 

Engineering Strategies and Practice 
APS111T -2018 

Final Exam RFP: Wireless Battery 
Recharging in a Factory 

Our client, a multi-national industrial manufacturer, sends its products to customers. After the customer 

has used the product, it is returned to our client. The product is repackaged in a factory and sent to 

other customers. Each product is used and repackaged many times. 

Our client is developing a battery-powered device that will be attached to their products. The device will 

contain a rechargeable battery. Our client requires a system to recharge the batteries while the 

products are being repackaged in their factories. The system must be safe to use near large, metal 

objects. The system must be safe to use in a factory containing flammable liquids and gases (with 
appropriate containment facilities). 

Our client has a prototype device and plans to launch it on the market in 2019. They welcome proposals 

for wireless battery recharging mechanisms that can be implemented for full industrial use in 2019. 

POSSIBLE APPROACHES 

Our client is open to all solutions that can meet the requirements and specifications. 

Magnetic induction charging 

Magnetic resonance charging 

APPROACHES NOT OF INTEREST 

Wired recharging 

Energy harvesting technologies 

The successful technology should: 

Be a wireless, non-contact, recharging system 

Work in high throughput 

Recharge up to three thousand 4000mAh batteries per hour either in an inline process 
or in batches of ~100 batteries simultaneously 

With limited time for recharge (< few hours) 

Have a power transmission efficiency ~:85% 

Work in an industrial (factory) setting 

Work in close proximity to many, large metal objects 

Enable autonomous recharging with minimal operator input 

Robust to tough mechanical shocks 

Minimal heat generation 

Have high reliability and low maintenance 

Long system life-time (c. 10 years) 

Be safe to use in a factory containing flammable liquids and gases (with appropriate 

containment mechanisms) 

Receiver coil: 

Will fit into a device 15l20mm diameter, :5170mm long 

May allow metallic parts inside the coil loop 

System must: 

Adhere to appropriate standards for example: cli, Alliance for Wireless Power or Power 

Matters Alliance 

Comply with relevant safety regulations 

Based on a NineSigma RFP # 69687 

