UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
Course Information 

CIV100F and APS160F – “MECHANICS” 

 September 2025 

Course: 

Lecturers: 

CIV100F is the in-person option of the course. All students are initially registered in this course. 
APS160F is the optional online option of the course. Students are encouraged to enroll in the online 
option to experience a more technologically advanced method of course delivery (refer to F.1). 

Course Coordinator: Prof. M. Seica 
Section 1: Prof. M. Seica  
Section 2: Prof. M. Seica  
Section 3: Prof. T. El-Diraby 

Section 4: Prof. O. Mercan 
Section 5: M. Haghighi   
Section 6: Prof. S. Saxe   

Section 7: Prof. D. Panesar 
Section 8: C. Pavlidis 
Online:     Prof. M. Seica 

Teaching Assistants:  Two TAs will be assigned to each tutorial section. 

Lectures: 

Most subject matter and new concepts will be disseminated: 
•  CIV100F: In class/person. Refer to ACORN for up-to-date timetable and location. 
•  APS160F: No classroom lectures. Online videos will be made available on Quercus on a weekly 

basis, on Saturdays at 00:05, for asynchronous delivery. 

Support: 

Tutorials (and optional Additional Help sessions) will be provided: 
•  CIV100F: In class/person. Refer to ACORN for up-to-date timetable and location. 
•  APS160F: Exclusively through online communication tools (MS Teams & Piazza). 
•  Refer to the specific details published in each individual course section site(s) on Quercus. 
•  E-mail communication is not acceptable. Do NOT send e-mails to the Teaching Team. 

Basis of Final Grade:  Weekly Assigned Problem Sets 
Quizzes  
Midterm Examination 
Final Examination 
Total 

= 5% 
= 10% 
= 35% 
= 50%   
= 100%  

Calculators:   A  scientific  calculator  is  extremely  valuable  for  this  course.  The  following  non-programmable 
calculators are approved by the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering, and are mandatory. 
Absolutely no other calculator model will be permitted at tests. 

Required Text: 

•  Casio FX-991 (any suffix is acceptable) 
•  Sharp EL-W516, or EL-520 (any suffix is acceptable) 

Hibbeler, R.C. “Engineering Mechanics: Statics”, 15th Edition, SI Units, Pearson Education 
(eText and optional Mastering Engineering). Students can purchase the eText version or the 
hard copy from Pearson Education, the UofT Bookstore, the Engineering Stores, or from 
elsewhere. Students in APS160F must purchase access to Mastering Engineering from 
Pearson  Education,  either  as  a  package  with  the  textbook,  or  separately. 
Complementary Notes on additional topics (some optional), not covered in the textbook, will 
be available for download from Quercus. Second-hand (i.e. used) textbooks are acceptable; 
other/older editions of the textbook are not. 

over… 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Content: 

Refer to the additional handout, posted on Quercus. 

Course Website: 

Quercus will be used extensively, including for posting of course material, 
communications and listing of unofficial marks. 

There are two course shells available for CIV100F: Lectures and Tutorials. Each shell 
contains dedicated modules for each Lectures section (e.g. LEC0101, LEC0102,…, 
LEC0108) and Tutorials section (e.g. TUT0101, TUT0102,…, TUT0122). Important 
information relevant to the students in all sections will be posted and section-specific 
material and activities will be disseminated and conducted. 

There is a general course shell with comprehensive instructions and lecture material 
intended for APS160F students (APS160F ONLINE). It is important that APS160F 
students read and become familiar with the relevant instructions posted there. In 
addition, the CIV100F Lectures shell will also be available. 

Notes about the Assigned Problem Sets, Quizzes and Examinations 

A.  Assigned Problem Sets 

A.1. Assignments must be done neatly, in pencil, on one side only of the paper. Engineering problem paper, 
which is sold in pads by the Engineering Stores located in the basement of the Sandford Fleming Building is 
strongly recommended. Other paper, preferably quad ruled, will be accepted only if engineering paper cannot 
be sourced. Digital engineering paper for computers and tablets is acceptable. A straight edge is required 
for drawing lines, but scales and protractors are not mandatory. A good eraser is invaluable. Lack of neatness 
will be promptly penalised. 

A.2. The assigned problem sheet will be posted on Quercus, on a weekly basis. Details will be announced in 
Quercus.  The  solution,  excluding  the  problem  sheet,  must  include  the  final  answer(s),  clearly  identified, 
together with all the necessary diagrams and calculations. 

A.3. The completed assignments must be submitted by uploading the solution in PDF format on Quercus. 
Late submissions will normally not be accepted and assessed. 

A.4. Each assigned problem set will contain four or more problems which all must be attempted. Up to 5 
marks will be awarded for one question only, selected randomly. If one or more questions are not attempted 
reasonably, a mark of zero will be assigned instead. The marks obtained will be posted on Quercus. 

A.5.  The  purpose  for  the  assignments  (non-closely  supervised  tests)  is  to  practice  problem  solving  in 
preparation for the common closely supervised tests. The assignments represent a bare minimum and, for 
achieving success in the course, additional problems can be found in the textbook and elsewhere. 

B.  Quizzes  

CIV100F Students 

B.1. There will be two half-hour, in-person quizzes, scheduled on 23 September and 11 November (subject 
to change). Details will be announced in due course in the CIV100F Lectures section. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APS160F Students 

B.2. Weekly quizzes will be ½ hour long and will be held online using an automated online system (Mastering 
Engineering). They will be on the same topic as the problem set assigned in the previous week. 

B.3. The quizzes will be made available on Wednesdays by 20:00 EDT/EST and must be completed by the 
following Monday at 20:00 EDT/EST. The problems, although similar for all students, may have the data 
randomized. Students will have two attempts to submit their answers within the time allocated. 

B.4. Each quiz will be marked out of 10 marks. At the end of the term, one quiz score (the lowest) will be 
dropped for each student. The marks obtained will be posted on Quercus. 

C.  Midterm Examination 

C.1. The midterm examination will be conducted in person, will be 1-½ hours long, and is scheduled on 
Thursday, 23 October (subject to change). Details will be announced in due course in the CIV100F Lectures 
section.  

C.2. The midterm examination is common for all CIV100F and APS160F students. 

D.  Term Work Re-mark Requests 

D.1. Any requests for re-marking of term work shall be submitted by filling in and submitting / uploading a 
Quiz & Test Re-mark Request Form available on Quercus (CIV100F Lectures), clearly indicating the reasons 
why the student believes a re-evaluation is necessary. 

D.2. The form must be submitted to the Teaching Assistant responsible for grading the work considered. 
Additional details will be provided in due course. 

E.  Final Examination 

E.1. The final examination will be conducted in person and will be 2-½ hours long. The date, time and location 
for the examination will be published by the Registrar’s Office (see ACORN) in early November.  

E.2. The final examination is common for all CIV100F and APS160F students. 

F.  Miscellaneous 

F.1. For all administrative questions, including requests to enroll in APS160F (online), please contact 
the First-Year Office. 

F.2. Important: This course requires the use of computers and IT equipment, and relies on a fast and 
stable Internet connection, and many things can go wrong when using such devices and services. You 
are responsible for ensuring that you maintain regular backup copies of your files, use antivirus software 
(if using your own computer), maintain a reliable connection to the Internet and schedule enough time 
when completing your homework and tests, in order to allow for potential delays due to technical 
difficulties. Computer viruses, crashed hard drives, broken printers, lost or corrupted files, incompatible 
file formats, disconnection from the Internet and similar mishaps are common issues when using 
technology, and are not acceptable grounds for deadline extensions. (Note: If an unexpected technical 
issue occurs with a university system (e.g. Quercus) that affects its availability or functionality, it may be 
necessary to revise the timing or weighting of the assessments.) 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F.3. The University of Toronto has made efforts to ensure that students are able to access the online 
tools which are necessary for the successful completion of the course. In an unlikely event that this 
access may be impeded, such a situation will be evaluated and resolved on an individual and specific 
basis. 

F.4. Video recording and sharing: This course is pre-recorded and/or will be recorded on video, 
including student participation, and will be available to the students in the course for viewing remotely 
and after each session. All course videos and materials belong to the course instructor, the University 
and/or to other sources, depending on the specific conditions of each situation, and are protected by 
copyright. Do not download, copy, or share any course or student materials or videos without the 
explicit permission of the instructor. For questions about recording and use of videos in which you may 
appear, please contact your instructor. 

F.5. A final note: Plagiarism is a serious academic offence; sanctions can range from a zero mark to 
expulsion from the university programme and a note on the transcript. While student collaboration is 
encouraged,  note  that  plagiarizing  the  work  for  assignments,  quizzes  and  examinations  will  defeat  the 
educational purpose of these tests. Without adequate training, study and practice, a successful performance in 
the course will be in jeopardy. 

4 

 
 
