Practise Problem Set 1

MAT 187 - Summer 2025

These questions are meant for your own practice for quiz 1 and are not to be handed in.
Some of these questions, or problems similar to these, may appear on the quizzes or exams.
Therefore, solutions to these problems will not be posted but you may, of course, ask about
these questions during office hours, or on Piazza.

Suggestions on how to complete these problems:

• Solution writing is a skill like any other, which must be practiced as you study. After
you write down your rough solutions, take the time to write a clear readable solu-
tion that blends sentences and mathematical symbols. This will help you to retain,
reinforce, and better understand the concepts.

• After you complete a practice problem, reflect on it. What course material did you
use to solve the problem? What was challenging about it? What were the main ideas,
techniques, and strategies that you used to solve the problems? What mistakes did
you make at the first attempt and how can you prevent these mistakes on a Term Test?
What advice would you give to another student who is struggling with this problem?

• Discussing course content with your classmates is encouraged and a mathematically
healthy practice. Work together, share ideas, explain concepts to each other, compare
your solutions, and ask each other questions. Teaching someone else will help you
develop a deeper level of understanding. However, it’s also important that reserve
some time for self-study and self-assessment to help ensure you can solve problems on
your own without relying on others.

1. Evaluate the following integrals:

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

(a)

(b)

(c)

x2 sin(2x − 3)dx

ln(1 − x2)dx

√

ln(x +

x2 − 1)dx

2. Evaluate the following integrals:

x2
(x2+9)3/2 dx
x6 − x8dx

(a) (cid:82)
(b) (cid:82) √
(c) (cid:82)

x2

√

1
x2+1

dx

1

3. Evaluate the following integrals:

(a) (cid:82)
16−7x
(4x2−1)(x2−2x+2) dx
(b) (cid:82) x6+3x5−3x3+6x2+6x+1
x3+3x2+2x
(c) (cid:82)
4x
(4x2−4x+2)(x−1)2 dx

dx

4. Given any constants a, b, c with a > 0, find a general formula for the integral
(cid:90)

abx sin(cx)dx

Consider the possible cases carefully.

5. Consider the integral

(cid:90) P (x)
D(x)

dx

where P (x) is a polynomial of degree n and

D(x) = (x − a)(x − b)

for two real numbers a, b such that a ̸= b. Show that we can always evaluate this
integral via the method of partial fractions.

6. A reduction formula is an equation that takes an integral involving a parameter n and

returns a similar integral with a lower parameter (usually n − 1 or n − 2).
(a) Find a reduction formula for (cid:82) xnexdx in terms of (cid:82) xn−1exdx. Find a formula for

(cid:82) xnexdx that does not include integrals.

(b) Find a reduction formula for (cid:82) xn sin(x)xdx. Find a formula for (cid:82) xn sin(x)dx

that does not include integrals.

(c) Find a reduction formula for (cid:82) xn ln(x)xdx. Find a formula for (cid:82) xn ln(x)dx that

does not include integrals.

7. A squirrel has buried an acorn in the lawn of King’s College Circle in the hopes of
eating it later. The probability that the acorn will sprout between the start of day n
and the start of day m (where 0 ≤ n ≤ m) is given by

4
π

(cid:90) m

n

ex
e2x + 1

dx

What is the probability that the squirrel can return after seven days and dig up an
unsprouted acorn?

8. A team of scientists is launching a rocket into low Earth orbit. When the rocket’s fuel
tank is empty, the rocket has mass mr. The rocket burns fuel as it ascends, so after
launch the mass of fuel in the rocket at height y above the surface of the Earth is
given by the function

mf (y) =

10mr
1 + y

The rocket must fight against the gravitational force, denoted F , which is given by
Newton’s law of universal gravitation

where

F =

GM m
d2

2

• M is the mass of the Earth,
• m is the total mass of the rocket (including fuel),
• d is the distance from the rocket to the centre of the Earth, and
• G is the universal gravitational constant.

(a) Find a formula for d in terms of y and the radius of the Earth rE (assume that

the earth is perfectly spherical).

(b) Find a formula for m.

(c) Using the above answers, find a formula for the gravitational force as a function

of y. You do not need to find the values of M and G.

(d) Use partial fractions to write the gravitational force as a sum of irreducible frac-

tions.

(e) Write an integral formula for the amount of work required to lift the rocket to an
altitude of A metres above the surface of the Earth. Note that work, as defined
in physics, is the integral of force.

(f) Evaluate the integral formula you obtained in part (e).

3

