Winter 2023
MAT187 – Calculus II – Syllabus

Course Content

Roughly, the content of this course can be summarized as follows: first, we will talk about integration
techniques; then, we will work with first and second order ordinary differential equations; next, we
will talk about Taylor Polynomials and Taylor Series; and finally, we will talk about functions that
depend on one variable (often: time) but give a vector as output (often: a position in space).

This description, however, gives only half the picture. We will study more than just techniques and
procedures in this course; we will actually look at the concepts they are built on. What does that
mean? It means that we will look into engineering applications and see how the concepts we learn in
this class are abstractions of concepts we discover in real life models. We will use this connection to
work on engineering problems using our newly expanded “math toolbox.”

A detailed overview of the course content can be found on the next page.

Learning Goals

You should become fluent in various concepts related to Calculus as outlined in the list of modules on
the next page. This means you should be able to …

• … understand the meaning of these concepts and see why they are applicable in certain situations.
• … use these concepts to study the properties of a system in physical and engineering applications.
• … critically analyze your results based on these concepts to check whether or not they make sense.

We want to train you in the art of problem solving. In your future career as an engineer, you will see
problems that you have not seen before. We want you to be able to figure out by yourself how to
adjust the methods you know to fit new situations and to be confident of your solutions. You can only
achieve this by understanding concepts rather than memorizing formulas and methods.

We want to train you in the art of team work and communication. As future engineers, you will
serve an important role at the boundary between science and its applications. You will have to talk to
business partners, manufacturers, designers, construction workers, investors. You will need to be able
not just to arrive at correct mathematical answers but make others understand you, believe you, and
trust you.

Textbooks

Strang and Herman: OpenStax Calculus Volume 2. (2016)
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-2
Strang and Herman: OpenStax Calculus Volume 3. (2016)
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-3

Available for free as…
…an interactive online textbook
…a downloadable PDF
…an app

If you prefer a printed copy, you can have the PDF printed (in part or in whole) at the U of T bookstore
(or any other copyshop). No worries, doing so is completely legal according to the license of the book.

page 1

Winter 2023 – MAT187 – Calculus II – Syllabus

Content Overview

The course content is divided in six modules based on the topic. The modules are labelled by A to F. We will not spend an

equal amount of time on every module. The letters CV2 and CV3 refer to “OpenStax Calculus Volume 2” and “OpenStax

Calculus Volume 3”

A
A1

A2

A3

Integration methods
Integration by parts

Trigonometric Substitution

Partial Fractions

A4 Numerical Integration

A5

Improper Integrals

Applications of Integration

B
B1 Riemann Sums

C
C1

C2

C3

First order ODEs
Introduction to ODEs

Separable ODEs

Linear First-Order ODEs

C4 Qualitative Analysis of ODEs

C5 Modelling with ODEs

D Second order ODEs
D1 Homogeneous Equations

D2 Non-Homogeneous Equations

D3 Applications

E
E1

E2

E3

Taylor Series
Approximating with Taylor Polynomials

Taylor Series

Ratio Test for Convergence

E4 Manipulating Power Series

F
F1

F2

Vector Valued Calculus
Parametric Equations

Polar Coordinates

F3 Calculus in Polar Coordinates

F4

F5

Vector Valued Functions

Arc Length

F6 Normal Vector and Curvature

F7 Motion in Space

Textbook

CV2, 3.1

CV2, 3.3

CV2, 3.4

CV2, 1.1/3.6

CV2, 3.7

CV2, 1.1/1.2/2.*

CV2, 4.1

CV2, 4.3

CV2, 4.5

CV2, 4.1/4.2

CV2, 4.4

CV3, 7.1

CV3, 7.2

CV3, 7.3

CV2, 6.3

CV2, 6.3

CV2, 5.6/6.1

CV2, 6.2/6.4

CV3, 7.1/7.2

CV2, 7.3

CV2, 7.4

CV3, 3.1/3.2

CV3, 3.3

CV3, 3.3

CV3, 3.4

page 2

Winter 2023 – MAT187 – Calculus II – Syllabus

Teaching Team

Instructor

Section

Email

Sa’diyya Hendrickson

LEC0101/Lec0102

shendri@math.toronto.edu

Camelia Karimianpour

coordinator

admin187@math.toronto.edu

LEC0102/ LEC0103

ckarimia@math.toronto.edu

Geoffrey McGregor

Jose Palacios

LEC0103

LEC0101

geoffrey.mcgregor@utoronto.ca

jose.palacios@utoronto.ca

• See Quercus for the list of TA names and contact information.

• You can find the time and location of lectures and tutorials here.

• Drop-in hours and their location for each instructor will be posted on Quercus.

• If you have a question about any aspect of the course, please follow the Asking Questions section

in this document.

Course Website

• The official course page is https://q.utoronto.ca/courses/291463

Quercus is our main communication platform. All course material and information, including an-
nouncements, tutorial information, TA and instructor drop-in hours (aka office hours or question
hours), homework and solutions, pre-class essential readings and in-class reflection surveys, exam
details, and all the relevant deadlines and announcements are done via Quercus. Quercus will get
updated frequently as the semester progresses. It is your responsibility to check it regularly.

• Find our Piazza class page here. Piazza is also accessible directly from the course page on Quercus.

We will be using Piazza for class discussions. If you have a math question or a logistic question you
should ask it in Piazza (and not over email). See the Asking Questions section in this document for
more instructions. The earlier you start using Piazza, the happier you will be!

page 3

Winter 2023 – MAT187 – Calculus II – Syllabus

Assessments

Assessment

Weight

Reflections

Tutorial Teamwork

Online Homework

Pre-Class Essentials

Midterms

Final Exam

2%

18%

10%

10%

25%

35%

• Lecture Reflections. The only way to learn mathematics is by doing mathematics. In this course
you are asked to be an active agent in your own learning. You are expected to be present in all
sessions of your lectures and tutorials. During lectures, you will be asked to work on problems with
help of your peers, and share your ideas with the class. Some lectures will end with a reflection
activity. The content and format will vary and depends on the activities you done in class that
week.

• Tutorial Teamwork. Tutorials are weekly sessions facilitated by your TAs. During tutorials you
will work in groups on a tutorial worksheet. The worksheet will cover a variety of standards such
as basic computations, core concepts, analysis of ideas, and mathematical language. The specifics
for each worksheet will vary. In tutorials, time will be dedicated to working on tutorial worksheets,
including giving and receiving feedback from TAs and classmates. At the end of each tutorial, you
will submit your work, as a group. There may be a re-submission chance for some of the worksheets.
You will receive feedback and a grade on your submission. Worksheets will be graded with a
focus on the demonstration of the understanding of the learning objectives (standards)
covered in each question. You can demonstrate your understanding by explaining your
steps. For example, you would receive full points if you explain the issue that you are facing or
explain what you tried to solve the question but didn’t work and your explanation demonstrates
your understanding of the learning objectives, and you can receive no mark if you only submit a
correct final answer without a clean explanation of what took you there. If you, together with your
group decide to resubmit a worksheet you should meet as a group outside of the tutorial to work
on the re-submission. At the end of the semester, your best nine submissions are worth 2% each.

Don’t skip LECtures and TUTorials. Each one hour of attending LEC and TUT easily
saves you several hours of studying by yourself.

• Online Homework (WeBworK). There will be five WeBWorK assignments. Your lowest score will
be dropped. Please see the WebWorK page (accessible from our Quercus site) to see the due dates
and your grades. WeBWorK due dates and grades will not be reflected accurately on Quercus.

• Pre-Class Essentials (PCE). PCEs are assigned readings or videos, followed by a quiz. You are
expected to do the PCE before each lecture. There will be about 30 Pre-Class Essentials (PCEs).
Your lowest six scores will be dropped. See our Quercus page for the due dates.

• Exams. There will be two midterms and a final exam. Details on the exams will be announced

later.

page 4

Winter 2023 – MAT187 – Calculus II – Syllabus

Missed Evaluations

The petition policy of the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering can be found at
http://uoft.me/petitions. Do not wait to read these rules until an issue (like illness) arises. Read
them now so that if things actually happen, you already know how to proceed.

It is an academic offence to feign illness to skip any coursework.
Any foreseeable circumstances must be reported at least three weeks in advance. For example,
“I had a varsity sports game yesterday” is not acceptable since sports games are scheduled
weeks ahead. As soon as you know about scheduled events you should look at your academic
obligations and notify the coordinator of conflicts.

TAs are not authorized to give any kind of accommodation.

Missing PCEs
We are dropping your lowest six PCE marks. Therefore, you do not need to submit petitions unless
you had a legitimate reason to miss more than six PCEs. In that case, you need to submit a petition for
all occasions that you missed. If you receive a zero on a PCE due to having committed an academic
offence, that zero will not be dropped.

If you miss more than six PCEs and have a valid petition for all occasions (including the “first six
missed” PCEs), the remaining PCEs will be reweighted accordingly.

To clarify again: Filing up to six petitions for PCEs will have no effect since the lowest six
scores, including zeros, are dropped anyways, with or without petition. The rules described
above are supposed to save you from the hassle of filing petitions. They are not an addi-
tional way to excuse missed work. Of course, if you have more than six valid PCE petitions, all
of them will be honoured.

Missing WeBWorK

The same rules as for PCEs apply, by replacing “six PCEs” with “one WeBWorK set”.

Missing a Test or the Exam

If you miss a test without a valid petition, you will receive a grade of zero.

If you miss a test and a petition for it is deemed valid, we will will redistribute your marking scheme
at the discretion of the course coordinator.

Regarding the final exam, there are dedicated faculty policies around petitions. Please refer to the
faculty rules.

Missing Teamwork (tutorial)

If you have a petitionable reason to miss teamwork during tutorial, you must do two things: File a peti-
tion in the system and inform all your teammates in an email CCed to admin187@math.toronto.edu
and your TAs at least one hour before your tutorial. You only need to inform us that you filed a peti-
tion. You do not need to explain why you did so.

page 5

Winter 2023 – MAT187 – Calculus II – Syllabus

“Ghosting” your team

Generally, keep in mind that your team members depend on you. Be nice to each other and considerate
of each other’s study schedule and workload. You are considered to have “ghosted” your team if you
don’t show up to your tutorial and you don’t send a petition notification email as explained above,
or at any time you don’t reply to an email from one of your teammates regarding a worksheet re-
submission within 36h.

If you “ghosted” your team, you will be removed from the team for at least one subsequent tutorial,
that is you won’t be able to submit your tutorial work for at least one subsequent tutorial. You can
still attend your tutorial to work individually and ask questions from your TA, however your work will
not be accepted for grading.

Asking Questions

Our goal is to have all of your questions answered in a timely manner and to encourage you to ask
more math questions. If your situation is urgent, talk to your professor during their drop-in hours
(office hours), or come to the course coordinator’s drop-in hours (office hours). You can find details
about time and location of drop-in hours on Quercus. In all other cases, if you have a question please
follow the following procedure:

• All mathematical and administrative questions about the course should be asked on Piazza. Your
question and the responses will be visible to all students and the teaching team. You should choose
the most relevant folder in Piazza for your question.

• If you do not get an answer to your posted question on Piazza or, if your question contains personal
information that cannot be shared with the rest of the class (for instance, if you have a question
about your grade), then ask your question directly by emailing one of our head TAs. Your TA will
either respond directly or will forward your question to another member of the teaching team who
can address it.

• If, after emailing your TA, you still do not have an answer to your question, forward the email you
sent to your TA to admin187@math.toronto.edu, or directly to your professor. Your course
coordinator will check admin187@math.toronto.edu on a weekly basis.

• Once again, if your situation is urgent, talk to your professor after class or in their drop-in hours
(office hours), or come to the course coordinator’s drop-in hours (office hours). Note that ad-
min187@math.toronto.edu is not suitable for urgent emails.

Emailing Etiquette:

• You should always use your utoronto email address for all university related communication, including MAT187.

• Put MAT187 in the subject line followed by the subject of your email. For example “MAT187-Midterm 1 regrade

request”.

• Include your full name and your utorid in your email.

• Always check the course syllabus, Quercus, and Piazza for the answer to your question. If your question is

answered on the syllabus, Quercus, or Piazza, we may not respond to your email.

• Your email is a professional conversation between you and a member of the teaching team of course administra-
tion. Please use an appropriate tone and level of formality in your emails. We reserve the right to not consider
an email that is written unprofessionally.

• Note that we will not answer any math questions over email. All such questions should be publicly asked on

Piazza or during drop-in hours.

page 6

How to Succeed

This course is arranged along modules. You will encounter each mod-
ule in five different stages, gaining more and more independence.

1. Pre-class essentials. Learning the basics through self-study.

hours/week

contact
0

self-study
1.5

Before each class you will spend about 30 minutes learning about the elementary concepts of the
module. Afterwards, there will be a short quiz with one or two questions. The quiz is designed so
that it is straightforward if you have studied the pre-class essentials.
Essentials are essential. In class, we will assume that you have done the pre-class essentials. If you
did not do so, you will quite likely not be able to follow class.

2. Classroom. Applying the basics and diving in deeper.

3

0

Class takes place in MY150 in an active classroom setting. It will be a mix of the instructors in-
troducing concepts and everyone working in groups. Each class will be supported by at least two
instructors and three TAs.
Lecture slides. When possible, we will publish lecture slides before class on Quercus.
Assigned seating will be used in the classroom. You will be able to elect to sit in a “No Distraction
Zone” if you prefer. In this zone, snacks, phones and other distractions are not allowed.

3. Tutorials. Working in teams on tutorial worksheets.

1

1

Weekly tutorials are facilitated by TAs. Every week, you will work on a worksheet in groups. You
will then receive feedback on those worksheets. This is intended to be a formative assessment. This
means: You will not be assessed for only correctness. Instead, the worksheets are intended to help
you learn and grow. What matters most is that you explain your approach, no matter if it is correct
or not. Presentation counts! In the tests, part of the marking will be based on how well you present
and explain your solutions; tutorial worksheets provide good practice for you. There will be a few
re submission opportunities. As a team, you can decide whether you wish to resubmit a worksheet
that is open for re-submission. If you decide to do so, you will be working on your re-submission
outside of the tutorial time.
Tutorial time is question time. As you are working on the tutorial worksheet, use it as a chance to
talk to TAs and ask any questions about the course material.
Check your tutorial assignment. You must attend the tutorial that you are assigned to according to
ACORN. Otherwise you won’t be able to receive credit for teamwork.

4. Studying. Solidifying your knowledge with on-demand support.

mileage varies*

Based on the classroom and tutorial experience, you will now have an idea which concepts are
clear to you and which you should work on. There are many resources at your disposal to help you
study. You can ask questions on the course’s Piazza page and all instructors offer designated “Drop
in hours” for your support.
Suggested problems can be found on Quercus. Note that the textbook exercises are very basic ex-
ercises and that the tutorial worksheet exercises are more indicative of what is expected in a term
test.
Study smart. Your learning experience in this course will improve dramatically if you follow a sched-
ule that distributes the load across your thirteen weeks, rather than falling behind and trying to
catch up right before exams. Study math at least two or three times a week, every week.

5. Assessments. WeBWorK, Teamwork, Tests.

mileage varies*

You can find more details on the assessments in this course under ”Assessments” in this document.

* The time you need depends on your own learning experience. However, in addition to the 1.5 hours
for the essentials, you should spend at least 3.5 hours per week studying for this course.

page 7

Winter 2023 – MAT187 – Calculus II – Syllabus

Important Tools

Quercus is the central repository from which all course content can be reached. It
is where we will post the PCEs, the lecture material, Zoom links, PDF copies of all
assessments, study advice, drop-in hour info, this syllabus, etc. Whatever you are
looking for, you can probably find it here.

Zoom is our meeting software that we may use for office hours or other virtual ses-
sions.

Piazza is our discussion board. Do not hesitate to ask questions on here. It’s a great
place to both ask questions and to help each other out. Instructors and TAs will also
be available to answer questions.

Gradescope is our assessment submission and grading software. All Team Worksheets
and Tests will be administered via gradescope.

Make sure that you use gradescope.ca

and not gradescope.com (different servers).

Wolframalpha is a computational tool that can solve many math (and other) problems
thanks to its vast procedural knowledge. On the other hand, it can not conceptualize.
The fact that computers can’t do that is one of the reasons why MAT187 focusses on
concepts instead of procedures.

Desmos is a free online plotting tool that can be a great help when you are trying
to visualize functions and their graphs. It can visualize derivatives, Riemann sums,
integrals, tangents, intersections, and many more things. You can even create art with
it, in particular when plotting polar curves! You can start with 𝑟 = sin(8𝜃).

Accessibility Needs

The University of Toronto is committed to accessibility and making MAT187 accessible to everyone is
very important to us. If you require accommodations, or have any accessibility concerns about the
course, the classroom, or course materials, please contact Accessibility Services as soon as possible at
http://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca/as.

You are welcome, but are in no way obliged, to speak directly with us about any accommodations you
require. You can rest assured of our confidentiality.

page 8

Winter 2023 – MAT187 – Calculus II – Syllabus

Copyright Notice

You must not take audio recordings or video recordings of lectures or tutorials unless you received
the written consent of the person whose work you are recording (consent will normally be given for
accessibility reasons).

There are on-campus and off-campus enterprises out there that offer so called “course preparation” and
that will ask you to provide course material to them, sometimes in exchange for money, sometimes
in exchange for “free help”, sometimes without any direct benefit to you. You must not share the
material of this course with such enterprises. There are two main reasons for this:

1. You would help companies to rip off students by making money from selling our material. Material
that we provide for free to the students of our course.

2. Think about how you would feel if you wrote a book and then someone else sold it for money
for their gain. That’s how we feel when you give them our material.

For these reasons the copyright holders hereby explicitly deny the right to share the course mate-
rial with anyone who is not enrolled in the course. If you do so, you will get into legal trouble, and
depending how you shared what material you will also face academic disciplinary action.

Mental Health and Wellness

As a university student, you may experience a range of issues, for example regarding your physical
or mental health, regarding your financial situation or regarding your friends and family. These may
result in significant barriers to achieving your personal and academic goals. The University of Toronto
offers a wide range of free and confidential services and programs that may be able to assist you. I
encourage you to seek out these resources early and often.

You can find resources at http://studentlife.utoronto.ca/hwc

If, at some point during the year, you find yourself in need of immediate support, visit the Feel-
ing Distressed Webpage: http://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca/feeling-distressed, for more campus
resources.

Immediate help is available 24/7 through U of T’s My Student Support Program in 35 languages.
You can call via phone or wifi or even chat using the app. Details can be found at

https://studentlife.utoronto.ca/service/myssp/

All students in the Faculty of Engineering have an Academic Advisor who can advise on academic
and personal matters. You can find your department’s Academic Advisor here: http://undergrad.
engineering.utoronto.ca/advising-support-services/academic-advising/

page 9

Winter 2023 – MAT187 – Calculus II – Syllabus

Academic Integrity: Why It Matters

We at U of T want you to feel proud of what you accomplish as a student. Please respect all of
the hard work you’re doing this term by making sure that the work you do is your own.

We don’t expect you to score perfectly on the assessments and there will be some things that
you may not know. Using an unauthorized resource or asking someone else for the answer robs
you of the chance to later feel proud of how well you did because you’ll know that it wasn’t
really your work that got you there.

Success in university isn’t about getting a certain mark, it’s about becoming the very best person
you can by enriching yourself with knowledge, strengthening yourself with skills, and building
a healthy self-esteem based on how much you’ve grown and achieved. No one assessment
captures that but your conscience will stay with you forever. Make yourself and your loved
ones proud of the student that you are by conducting yourself honestly at all times.

The text above outlines why academic integrity is so important to us, to the university, and to the
professional engineering society, and why it should also be important to you. We know that the vast
majority of students are honest. If you are one of them, we want to say that we appreciate this and
thank you for your commitment to learning! Honouring the achievements of hardworking students
like you is one of the major reasons why we implement the policies below. Honesty always pays off
in the long run!

If you are experiencing personal challenges that are having an impact on your academic
work, please do NOT commit an academic offence. Instead, talk to us or your academic
advisor. We are very understanding and happy to help if you are facing any issues. There is
never a valid reason for committing an academic offence. Please talk to us!

Academic Integrity: The Fine Print

Familiarize yourself with the University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters,
available at https://www.academicintegrity.utoronto.ca/.

You are expected to know the rules. Not being aware of a rule is not an acceptable excuse for
not having followed it (just as in “real life”).

If you have any questions about what is or is not permitted in this course, please do not hesitate
to contact us.

As specified on the first page, usually your lowest PCE and WeBWorK scores are dropped. These rules
do not apply for assessments in which you committed an academic offence and received a sanction
of “zero on the assessment”. Such an assessment will always receive the highest weight possible
according to the rules of the syllabus.

Potential offences include, but are not limited to:

• Posting assessment questions on any kind of website/online forum to solicit help,
• Using someone else’s ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement,
• Looking at someone else’s answers during an exam or test,
• Misrepresenting your identity,

page 10

Winter 2023 – MAT187 – Calculus II – Syllabus

• Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment (this includes working in groups

on assignments that are supposed to be individual work),

• Falsifying or altering any documentation required by the University, including (but not limited to)

forms related to a petition.

It is an Academic Offence both to receive or to provide unauthorized assistance. It does not
matter if you “helped” or “were helped”.

The University of Toronto treats cases of academic misconduct very seriously. All suspected cases of
academic dishonesty will be investigated following the procedures outlined in the Code. The conse-
quences for academic misconduct can be severe, including a failure in the course and a notation on
your transcript. Every year, students get expelled from the University of Toronto for academic offences.

Remember that you enrolled in University to learn something.

page 11

