MAT 186 – CALCULUS I 
WINTER TERM 2025 

Shai Cohen 
e-mail: sh.cohen@utoronto.ca  
Please use either the above address or Piazza to reach me.  Other methods tend to be much 
slower. 

[Professor may not look precisely as pictured] 

INSTRUCTOR 

THE COURSE 

This  course  aims  to  teach  you  more  than  simply  a  set  of  mathematical  tools  for 
Engineering.    Our  goal  is  to  help  you  understand  some  of  the  ideas  behind  how 
these tools work, so that you will be better able to  use them; to show you how to 
apply  calculus  to  your  other  courses;  and  to  teach  you  how  to  write  a  proper 
solution.  This last idea is extremely important  – you cannot convince anyone that 
you  are  a  good  engineer  if  they  cannot  understand  how  you  reach  your 
conclusions.   

We will run this course as an inverted class – lecture videos will be available on Quercus and we will use class time 
to work on problems that will help us to understand the material, its applications, and its writing. 

LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

𝑓′(𝑥) = lim
ℎ→0

𝑓(𝑥 + ℎ) − 𝑓(𝑥)
ℎ

There are certain goals that we hope to achieve in this 
class, of which the ability to take limits and derivatives is 
only the first – and definitely not the greatest.  We want 
to be able to see you develop facility in writing proper 
solutions, communicating your ideas well, and applying 
all of these to simple scenarios in the real world.  Below 
is a list of the goals we find the most vital for this course. 

•  Use the standard algorithmic topics in the course (differentiate, calculate, integrate, etc…) 
•  Understand the syntax of a solution  
o  Needs meaningful feedback 
o 

Identify and meaningfully use correct syntax  

•  Plan an approach to a solution, and identify different solution paths 
•  Communicate a mathematical solution [live and on exam] 
•  Analyze solution with respect to physical or mathematical constraints 
•  Apply mathematical tools to a real-world situation without cues for which tools to use 

Page 1 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A NOTE REGARDING YOUR HEALTH 

Engineering at the University of Toronto is a demanding program.  The amount of work 
and  the  rate  at  which  assignments  and  tests  come  and  go  can  be  overwhelming.  
Many  students  find  themselves  experiencing  physical,  mental,  or  fiscal  health  issues 
that stop them from demonstrating their ability and their learning. 

If you have any problems that significantly affect your performance, please seek out 
the assistance of the various services offered at this university.  These are generally free 
and confidential and may be able to help you show your full ability in your courses, as 
well as enjoy your time here. 

Do look for these resources as soon as you suspect that there is a problem.  Do not worry about the problem 
being too minor – let the professionals decide if they can help.  Also, it has been my experience that a lot of 
students avoid seeking help because they feel that they should not need “unfair advantages.”  The purpose of 
these services is not to give an unfair advantage, but to help remove an unfair disadvantage.  It may be difficult 
to ask for help, but it can make all the difference during your time here. 

Some general resources: 
My SSP: https://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca/hwc/myssp 
Student Life Website: http://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca 
Health and Wellness Website: http://studentlife.utoronto.ca/hwc 
Your department’s Academic Advisor: http://undergrad.engineering.utoronto.ca/advising-support-
services/academic-advising/ 
Accessibility Services: http://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca/as 

If, at some point during the year, you find yourself feeling distressed and in need of more immediate support, visit 
the Feeling Distressed Webpage: http://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca/feeling-distressed for more resources.  

Off campus, immediate help is available 24/7 through Good2Talk, a post-secondary student helpline at  

1-866-925-5454. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT(S) 

Mathematics is a subject that builds upon almost every element of its history.  Numbers and operations created 
thousands of years ago, as the need grew for the ability to count, to add, and so on, are still used today in every 
possible context.  Calculus as created in the 18th century is fundamentally what we use in this course. 

Similarly, the land on which the University of Toronto is built has a rich history that we should not neglect.  Humans 
have been on this land for over 15,000 years and their activities have helped to shape this unique city.  The name 
Toronto is derived from a Wendat word that came to mean “meeting place,” because of the frequent use of 
the area as grounds for nations to meet peacefully.  The diversity of the modern city is an impressive reflection of 
its history. 

The Toronto region is also a part of the Dish With One Spoon 
Wampum  Belt  Treaty.    A  wampum  belt  is  made  of  two 
serves  as  a  physical 
opposing-coloured 
embodiment  of  the  agreement  between  two  peoples.    To 
the left is a photo of a replica of the wampum belt that marks 
this particular treaty, in which multiple allied nations agreed 
to  share  the  land  and  its  resources  equitably.    The  region 
involved in the treaty is vast, covering large sections of south 
Ontario,  New  York,  Ohio,  Michigan,  and  beyond.    The 
metaphor of a dish with one spoon – the dish representing the area itself and the spoon representing our need 
to  share  it  and  to  do  so  peacefully  –  is  an  ancient  one,  but  its  importance  as  we  begin  to  see  the  effects  of 
climate change is swiftly increasing. 

shells  and 

Page 2 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
TEXTBOOK 

The textbook we will use for the course is Calculus, volumes 1 and 2 by Edwin Herman 
and  Gilbert  Strang.    This  is  an  open  text  (that  is,  a  freely  available  electronic  book), 
provided by Lyryx Learning.  It can be found at: 

https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1 
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-2 

If this book is not sufficient for your needs, the book Calculus for Scientists and Engineers 
– Early Transcendentals,  by Briggs, Cochran, and Gillett is widely available on campus 
and is very good.  We also recommend the textbooks by Blank and Krantz and by Stewart. 

GRADES 

Okay.  This is about to get strange. 

The grades in this course (other than the exam) will not be 
given in the usual manner.  The next page contains a list 
of attributes that will be taught in the course – some are 
specific  skills  (e.g.,  knowing  how  to  find  an  infinite  limit), 
while others are more abstract (e.g., uses of geometry). 

These attributes are divided into five categories:  
Algebra basics; Mathematical writing; Calculus fundamentals; Calculus skills; and Higher math skills. 

Each question and assignment during this semester will be given a score of 0 to 4 in some of these attributes (we 
will not let you know which ones we are looking for until after the due date, as identifying problems is an important 
skill).  These scores are meant to show how well you demonstrated your ability in the question and are defined 
on the next page.  Your final grade will depend on the marks you receive in the individual attributes. 

The exact calculations are complex may be subject to some changes if we feel that they need to be adjusted 
to better reflect the class’ understanding of the material.  The basic idea is:  

(a) We take a weighted average of your scores on any given attribute to get your attribute score, also on 

a 0 to 4 scale (for example, if the average is at least 0.75, then the score is a 1). 

(b)  We  use  the  attribute  scores  in  a  single  category  to  compute  the  category  score  (this  can  vary  for 
each category, but you may need 80% of the attributes to be at a score of 1 for the category score 
to be a 1). 

(c) The five category scores are used to compute your final grade by taking a weighted average. 

ASSIGNMENTS 

Quizzes – There will be weekly quizzes in the tutorials.  The quizzes will be cumulative – they will test not only the 
new material, but also the major points of previous work.  Some of this will give the opportunity not just to 
improve previous performance on some attributes, but to fully replace it. 

Group assignments – Three of these, due on February 7, March 7, and April 7.  All work must be submitted by 

11:59pm (EST) on its due date, or else be given a mark of zero.  Late work must have prior approval. 

Final examination – During the regular exam period.  The exam will be marked in the old-fashioned way and 

the mark averaged with the term mark of the other work (50% each). 

There will be opportunity to present solutions during lectures and this can earn bonus marks. 

Page 3 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEANING OF SCORES* 
Score  Category 

4 

3 

2 

1 

0 

Excellent 

Good 

Adequate 

Marginal 

Inadequate 

Definition 
Strong evidence of original thinking; good organization, capacity to analyze 
and  synthesize;  superior  grasp  of  subject  matter  with  sound  critical 
evaluations; evidence of extensive knowledge base. 
Evidence  of  grasp  of  subject  matter,  some  evidence  of  critical  capacity 
and analytic ability; reasonable understanding of relevant issues. 
Understanding of the subject matter; ability to develop solutions to simple 
problems in the material. 
Some evidence of familiarity with subject matter and some evidence that 
critical and analytic skills have been developed. 
Evidence  of  familiarity  with  only  some  subject  matter;  presence  of  some 
critical and analytic skills, but not sufficient for subsequent course. 

* Material in this table adapted from the Arts and Science calendar. 

COURSE ATTRIBUTES (MORE MAY BE ADDED ON QUERCUS, AS NEEDED) 

Algebra Basics 

Calculus Fundamentals 

Calculus Skills 

1.  Factoring polynomials 
2.  Algebra of exponents 
3.  Logarithms 
4.  Absolute values (taking 

cases) 

5.  Trigonometry 
6.  Domains of functions 
Inverses (existence, 
7. 
finding, graphing) 
8.  Sigma notation (and 

basic sums) 

Mathematical Writing 

1.  Reasonably neat 
penmanship 

2.  Clear progression through 

solution 

3.  Proper use of English 

(especially word problems) 

4.  Interpreting solutions 

1.  Basic limits 
2.  Limits to infinity 
3.  Trigonometric limits 
4.  Derivatives from limits 
5.  Tangent lines 
6.  Basic derivatives (product, 
quotient, chain rules) 
Implicit differentiation 

7. 
8.  Diagrams for word problems 
9.  Getting equations from 

diagrams 

10. Simple related rates 
11. Finding extrema (local, 

absolute) 

12. Intervals of increase/decrease 
13. Concavity 
14. Graphing polynomials 
15. Simple optimization 
16. Simple antiderivatives 
17. Remembering to write +C 
18. Riemann sums 
19. Easy integrals using Riemann 

sums 

20. Integral properties 
21. FTC 
22. Simple substitution 
23. Solving separable DEs 
24. Integral as net change 
25. Area between curves 
26. Simple applications of 

integrals 

1.  Challenging limits 
2.  Squeeze theorem 
3.  Asymptotes 
4.  Continuity (including ID of 

discontinuities) 

5.  IVT 
6.  Leibniz notation (especially for 

chain rule) 

7.  Advanced related rates 
8.  Logarithmic differentiation 
9.  Corners/cusps 
10. Adv. graphing 
11. Adv. optimization 
12. Linear approximation 
13. L'Hopital's rule (including when 

not to use) 

14. L'Hopital for exponents 
15. Advanced substitution 
16. Modeling DEs 
17. Volumes of rotation 
18. Advanced applications of 

integrals 

Higher Math Skills 

1.  Use of theorems to work 

efficiently 

2.  Use of geometry to simplify 

problems 

3.  Correct use of units 
4. 

Identify when a method fails 
(e.g., linear approximation) 

5.  Combining topics 
6.  Applying calculus to other 

courses 

Page 4 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
CALCULATORS 

While you can easily disregard this advice, I recommend not using calculators 
during this course.  Except for certain, obvious places, the arithmetic we do will 
be of the kind that it is better for you to be able to do yourself.  It will give you 
a better understanding of the material and, once you have enough practice, 
will be faster.   

Calculators will not be allowed in the quizzes and exam.  Slide rules are acceptable.  Really. 

COURSE SCHEDULE - TENTATIVE 

This schedule is subject to change.  If we feel that the class needs more work in a certain field, we will adjust this 
as needed.  For each section, we recommend doing as many exercises from the textbook as it takes to have a 
solid understanding of the different uses of the material in each section. 

For each of the main parts of the course, we have included an example of a type of question that we might ask 
(except for the first one – I just think it’s funny). 

WEEK 

SECTIONS 

NOTES 

Functions 

Jan. 13 – 17 

Jan. 20 – 24 

Limits 

Notice the interesting maximum allowed height noted 
in this sign from the Boston Commons.   

Discuss  briefly  why  using  one-to-one  functions  for 
notation is important in engineering. 

Chapter 1 
Do as many exercises as you need. 
Then, do a few more. 
Chapter 1 
Do as many exercises as you need. 
Then, do a few more. 

Quiz 1 

Three  examples  of  1-point  perspective  (one  from  Boston  and  two  here  at  UofT)  –  the 
parallel lines in the picture all aim at a single point.  Explain how 1-point perspective occurs 
in photos. 

Jan. 27 – 31 

2.1-3, 4.6, 2.4, 3.1 

Quiz 2 

Page 5 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
    
 
 
Derivatives 

This is the canopy at the entrance to Lash Miller (the two figures in the left pictures are both 
UofT  faculty  members).    How  does  the  angle  of  the  canopy  affect  the  forces  on  the 
structure?  How about when snow accumulates above? 

Feb. 3 – 7 

4.6, 2.4, 3.1 – 3.3 

Feb. 10 – 14 

3.4 – 3.9, 4.1 – 4.4 

Feb. 24 – 28 

4.2, 4.3, 4.7 

Mar. 3 – 7 

4.4 – 4.6, 4.8 – 4.10 

Quiz 3 

Project 1 

Quiz 4 

Quiz 5 

Quiz 6 

Project 2 

Integrals and 
Differential 
Equations 

Note the inclinometer on the crane (pictured below).   

How much work is required to lift the crane a further 20º? 

Mar. 10 – 14 

5.1 – 5.3 

Mar. 17 – 21 

5.4 – 5.7, 6.1 

Mar. 24 – 28 

6.2 – 6.6 

Mar. 31 – Apr. 7 

CV2: 4.1 – 4.3 

PHOTO CREDITS 
Bust of Newton – https://www.physics.utoronto.ca/~jharlow/teaching/phy151f13/ 
Page from the Principia Mathematica - http://newton.edwardworthlibrary.ie/books-by-newton/principia/ 
TI-30 calculator - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slide_rule 
Wampum belt – http://archaeologymuseum.ca/wampum/ 
All others – Shai Cohen 

Quiz 7 

Quiz 8 

Quiz 9 

Quiz 10 

Project 3 

Page 6 of 6 

 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
