MAT 188 — Linear Algebra
(cid:130) q.utoronto.ca
Text: Linear Algebra With Applications, Otto Bretscher, 5th edition

What is Linear Algebra?

Linear algebra is the art of using algebra to study flat geometrical shapes, some examples
of such geometrical shapes are lines and planes in the two and three dimensional spaces
that you are familiar with. Linear algebra tells us how to use the power of algebra to think
about higher dimensional flat objects and how to use them to solve a vast range of problems.
Linear algebra underlies a great deal of applications in sciences and engineering such as
acoustics and sounds, computer graphics, machine learning, and robotics to name a few.

About the Course

The purpose of this course is two-fold. On the one hand, you will learn concepts, techniques
and algorithms in elementary linear algebra. On the other, you will learn how to identify
these concepts in real world problems, model them, and apply technology (MATLAB) and
numerical methods to solve them.
We will start by learning how to solve systems of linear equations with the help of matrices.
Then we will reinterpret matrices as linear transformations, these are functions that uniformly
modify flat spaces. We will use our spacial intuition to guide our understanding of these
functions. Linear transformations and their matrix representations will stay at the heart of
the course throughout the semester. See the Course Calendar in this document for a detailed
list of topics we discuss in this course.
MAT188 will be taught via research-based teaching, learning, and assessment methods. In
lectures and tutorials, students will engage in ideas through an active, student-centered
teaching framework called inquiry-based learning. In an inquiry-based course students,
TAs and instructors work together to make sense of mathematical definitions, theorems,
and techniques to further our understanding of mathematical ideas and learn mathematical
habits of mind. Such courses are organized around student engagement in exercises in class
and outside of class.

Learning Outcomes

After taking this course, you will be able to:
○ Identify applications of linear algebra in other contexts, and situations.
○ Identify tools and employ technology to solve or understand problems.
○ Demonstrate computational fluency by hand and in MATLAB.
○ Distinguish between numerical evidence and mathematical argument.
○ Distinguish between numerical evidence and mathematical argument.
○ Translate between algebra and geometry to solve problems.
○ Approach and apply mathematical knowledge to novel problems.

1/9

Textbook:

Text: Linear Algebra With Applications, Otto Bretscher, 5th edition

○ You should have a physical or an electronic copy of the textbook. All readings and

homework are from this textbook.

Teaching Team

Instructor

Arthur Chan

Daniel Johnstone

Section

LEC0102

LEC0107

Email

arthurwh.chan@utoronto.ca

daniel.johnstone@utoronto.ca

Camelia Karimianpour

coordinator

admin188@math.toronto.edu

Geoffrey McGregor

Vardan Papyan

Ramon Ronzon Lavie

LEC0104 & 0105

ckarimia@math.toronto.edu

LEC0103

LEC0108

LEC0101

geoffrey.mcgregor@utoronto.ca

papyan@math.toronto.edu

ramon.ronzon@mail.utoronto.ca

○ See Quercus for the list of TA names and contact information
○ You can find the time and location of lectures here.
○ Question hours and their location for each instructor will be posted on Quercus.
○ If you have a question about any aspect of the course, please follow the Asking Questions

section in this document.

Course Website

○ The official course page is https://q.utoronto.ca/courses/282151

Quercus is our main communication platform. All course material and information, includ-
ing announcements, tutorial information, TA and instructor question hours (office hours),
homework and solutions, pre-class essential readings and in-class reflection surveys, exam
details, and all the relevant deadlines and announcements are done via Quercus. Quercus
will get updated frequently as the semester progresses. It is your responsibility to check it
regularly, at least every 2-3 days.

○ Find our Piazza class page here. Piazza is also accessible directly from the course page on

Quercus.

We will be using Piazza for class discussions. If you have a math question or a logistic
question you should ask it in Piazza (and not over email). See the Asking Questions section
in this document for more instructions. The earlier you start using Piazza, the happier
you will be!

2/9

Assessments

Assessment

Weight

Reflections

Tutorials

Online Homework (WeBWorK)

Pre-Class Essentials

Written Homework

MATLAB Practicals

Midterms

Final Exam

2%

5%

5%

5%

8%

15%

25%

35%

○ Reflections. The only way to learn mathematics is by doing mathematics. In this course
you are asked to be an active agent in your own learning. You are expected to be present
in all sessions of your lectures, tutorials, and practicals. During lectures, you will be asked
to work on problems with help of your peers, and share your ideas with class. Some
lectures will end by a reflection activity. The content and format varies and depends on
the activities you have done in class that week.

○ Tutorials. Tutorials are weekly sessions facilitated by your TAs. During tutorials you will
work in groups on a tutorial worksheet. The worksheet covers a variety of standards such
as basic computations, core concepts, analysis of ideas, and mathematical language. The
specifics for each worksheet will vary. In tutorials, time will be dedicated to working on
tutorial worksheets, including giving and receiving feedback from TAs and classmates. At
the end of each tutorial, you will submit your work, as a group. Your submission will be
graded against the set of course standards. You will receive feedback and a grade on your
submission.‘
Students should expect to submit a report about once every 2 weeks. Groups will be asked
to resubmit reports that do not meet the course standards.

○ WeBworK. There will be weekly online assignments called WeBWorK due every Wednes-
day at 11:59 pm. The lowest two WeBWorK grades will be dropped. The first WeBWork is
due on September 15th.

○ Pre-Class Essentials (PCE). PCEs are assigned readings or videos, followed by a quiz.
You are expected to do the PCE before the first lecture of the week. There will be weekly
PCEs due every week. See our Quercus page for the due dates. The lowest two PCE grades
will be dropped.

○ Written HomeWork. There will be five written homework assignments. The lowest grade

will be dropped. See our Quercus page for the dates.

○ MATLAB Practicals. There will be weekly assignments during your practicals.

○ Midterms. There will be two midterms, currently the midterms are scheduled for Oct 4,

1-3 pm and Nov 17th, 7-9 pm. The dates are subject to change.

3/9

○ Gateway. The Gateway exam is an online test which will be open for two weeks. You can
take the test as many times as you wish during the time the test is available until you pass
it. Failing to pass the test will cost you a third of a letter grade in your final grade for the
course (for example from B− to C +).

Missing Evaluations Policy

The petition policy of the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering can be found at
http://uoft.me/petitions. Do not wait to read these rules until an issue (like illness)
arises. Read them now so that if things actually happen, you already know how to proceed.
It is an academic offence to feign illness to skip any coursework. TAs are not authorized
to give any kind of accommodation. Here are course specific policies that are applied on top
of the FAES’s petition policy.

Missing PCEs
We are dropping your lowest two PCE marks. Therefore, you do not need to submit petitions
unless you had a legitimate reason to miss more than two PCEs. However, in that case, you
need to submit a petition for all occasions that you missed. Filing up to two petitions for
PCEs will have no effect since the lowest two scores, including zeros, are dropped anyways,
with or without petition.If you receive a zero on a PCE due to having committed an academic
offence, that zero will not be dropped in any circumstances.
If you miss more than two PCEs and have a valid petition for all occasions (including the
“first two missed” PCEs), the remaining PCEs will be reweighed accordingly.

Missing WeBWorK
The same rules as for PCEs apply to WeBWorK.

Missing Written Homework
The same rules as for PCEs and WeBWorK apply to Written Homework. The only difference
is we drop one lowest Written Homework as opposed to two. Therefore, you do not need
to submit petitions unless you had a legitimate reason to miss more than one Written
Homework. In that case, you need to submit a petition for all occasions that you missed
your Written HomeWork.

Missing an Exam
If you miss a Test without a valid petition, you will receive a grade of zero.
If you miss a Test and a petition for it was deemed valid, we will redistribute your marking
scheme according to the course coordinator’s discretion. Regarding the final exam, there
are dedicated faculty policies around petitions. Please refer to the faculty rules here: https:
//undergrad.engineering.utoronto.ca/petitions/final-exam-petitions/

4/9

Course Structure

Pre-Class Essentials (PCE). A typical week in our course starts by doing the PCEs for the
following week. PCEs are assigned readings, followed by a quiz on those readings. You
should do all the assigned readings for the week and submit your PCE quiz on Quercus
before your first lecture of that week. You will need to review the textbook before the other
two lectures in that week. PCEs make up 5% of your final grade. You should check our
Quercus page for the due dates of PCEs.
Lectures. You are assigned to a lecture section ranging between LEC0101 to LEC0108. You
will have weekly lectures. Lectures assume that you have done the PCEs for that week. You
are expected to actively participate in all lectures, and participate in all activities prompted
by your instructor. Your active participation in lecture is part of your grade.
Tutorials. You will have weekly tutorials. During tutorials, you will work with your class-
mates in small groups on tutorial worksheets. Tutorial sessions are facilitated by your TAs
and are one of the most important components of the course, because they facilitate your
communication with your peers. Make the most out of these short sessions by actively
explaining concepts to your group mates and ask them to do the same for you. Your active
participation in tutorials is part of your participation grade. Tutorials will begin in the week
of Sep 19th.
Practicals. You will have weekly practicals. Practicals are computer labs. During the
practicals you will learn to use MATLAB software to operate numerical computations related
to the concepts you learn in lectures and tutorials. Practicals give you a hands-on opportunity
to see the application of linear algebra in different disciplines and to practice problem solving
through theory and computation. During practicals you will work individually or in pairs
on your Lab assignments and projects. Lab assignments and exercises make up 15% of
your final mark. Your active participation in practicals is part of your participation grade,
measured by your answer to reflection questions in lab assignments. Practicals will begin in
the week of Sep 13th.
Homework. You will have four types of homework: weekly PCEs, weekly WeBWork assign-
ments, five sets of Written Homework, and weekly Lab assignments. See the Assessments
section in this document for details. You should regularly check Quercus for information
regarding homework.

How to Succeed

Here are a few tips to help you succeed in this course. You will find more on our course
webpage.
○ Most of your learning in this course will happen when you work with your peers in
tutorials, or on homework and suggested problems outside of class, and when you bring
your questions to one of our many question hours. Reading the textbook and lectures
only initiate the learning process. They are crucial to your learning, but are nowhere near
enough.

○ Form study groups and work with your peers as much as possible. Explain the concepts to
your peers and listen to them explaining the concepts to you. You know you understand a
concept if you can explain it well. Do not do all your study in isolation. Math is learned
best in interaction with others.

○ Get comfortable with feeling challenged. Learning is hard and challenging. If you don’t

5/9

feel challenged you are not learning. Indeed, learning feels quite uncomfortable for the
most part.

○ Never skip readings before class. You should always come to class with questions in
mind. Do not expect everything to be explained in lectures. Lectures always assume your
readings. Lectures are there to give you a guideline on how to approach new concepts
and to address your questions.

Asking Questions

Our goal is to have all of your questions answered in a timely manner and to encourage you
to ask more math questions. If your situation is urgent, talk to your professor after class or
during their question hours (office hours), or come to your course coordinator’s question
hours (office hours). You can find details about question hours on Quercus.

In all other cases, if you have a question please follow the following procedure:
○ All mathematical and administrative questions about the course should be asked in Piazza.
Your question and the responses will be visible to all students and the teaching team. You
should choose the most relevant folder in Piazza for your question.

○ If you do not get an answer to your posted question on Piazza or, if your question contains
personal information that cannot be shared with the rest of the class (for instance, if you
have a question regrading your grade), then ask your question directly by emailing your
TA. Your TA will either respond directly or will forward your question to another member
of the teaching team who can address it.

○ If, after emailing your TA, you still do not have an answer to your question, forward the
email you sent to your TA to admin188@math.toronto.edu, or directly to your professor.
Your course coordinator will check admin188@math.toronto.edu on a weekly basis.

○ Once again, if your situation is urgent, talk to your professor after class or in their question
hours (office hours), or come to your course coordinator’s question hours (office hours).

Emailing Etiquette:
○ You should always use your utoronto email address for all university related com-

munication, including MAT188.

○ Put MAT188 in the subject line followed by the subject of your email. For example

”MAT188-Midterm 1 regrade request”.

○ Include your full name and your utorid in your email.
○ Always check the course syllabus, and Quercus and Piazza for the answer to your
question. If your question is answered on the syllabus, Quercus, or Piazza we may
not respond to your email.

○ If your email is addressed to your professor start your email by ”Dear professor...”
and end with ”Best” or ”Thank you”. Please use an appropriate tone and level of
formality in your emails.

○ Note that we will not answer any math questions over email. All such questions

should be publicly asked on Piazza or during question hours.

6/9

Course Calendar

Here is a tentative order in which we will cover material and is only meant to give you an
overview. This order is subject to change.

Week 0 (Sep8-Sep9)
Week 1 (Sep 12-Sep 16)
Week 2 (Sep 19-Sep 23)
Week 3 (Sep 26-Sep 30)
Week 4 (Oct 3-Oct 7)
Week 5 (Oct 11-Oct 14)
Week 6 (Oct 17-Oct 21)
Week 7 (Oct 24-Oct 28)
Week 8 (Oct 31-Oct 4)

Topic
motivation, intro to linear systems
sets, vectors in Rn, lines and planes,
solving a system, Matrix form of a system
linear transformations, matrix algebra
composition of maps, matrix multiplication, inverse
determinant and properties
image, kernel, subspaces, linear independence
dimension, coordinates
orthogonal projection, Grahm Schmidt

Otto Bretscher
1.1
appendix A
1.2, 1.3
2.1,2.2
2.3, 2.4
6.1-6.2
3.1, 3.2
3.3, 3.4
5.1, 5.2

Week 9 (Nov 14-Nov 18)
Week 10 (Nov 21-Nov 25)
Week 11 (Nov 28-Dec 2)
Week 12 (Dec5-Dec 8)

orthogonal LT and matrices, least square
diagonalization, eigenvalues and vectors
more eigenvalues, applications
symmetric matrices, spectral theorem

5.3, 5.4
7.1,7.2
7.3
8.1, 8.2

Mental Health and Wellness

As a university student, you may experience a range of issues regarding, for example your
physical or mental health, your financial situation or your friends and family. These may
result in significant barriers to achieving your personal and academic goals. The University
of Toronto offers a wide range of free and confidential services and programs that may be
able to assist you. We encourage you to seek out these resources early and often. You can
find resources at http://studentlife.utoronto.ca/hwc. If, at some point during the year,
you find yourself in need of immediate support, visit the Feeling Distressed Webpage:
http://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca/feeling-distressed, for more campus resources.

Immediate help is available 24/7 through U of T’s My Student Support Program in 35
languages. You can call via phone or wifi or even chat using the app. Details can be
found at

https://studentlife.utoronto.ca/service/myssp/

All students in the Faculty of Engineering have an Academic Advisor who can advise on aca-
demic and personal matters. You can find your department’s Academic Advisor here: http:
//undergrad.engineering.utoronto.ca/advising-support-services/academic-advising/

7/9

Academic Integrity: Why It Matters

We at U of T want you to feel proud of what you accomplish as a student. Please
respect all of the hard work you’re doing this term by making sure that the work you
do is your own.

We don’t expect you to score perfectly on the assessments and there will be some things
that you may not know. Using an unauthorized resource or asking someone else for
the answer robs you of the chance to later feel proud of how well you did because
you’ll know that it wasn’t really your work that got you there.

Success in university isn’t about getting a certain mark, it’s about becoming the very
best person you can by enriching yourself with knowledge, strengthening yourself
with skills, and building a healthy self-esteem based on how much you’ve grown
and achieved. No one assessment captures that but your conscience will stay with
you forever. Make yourself and your loved ones proud of the student that you are by
conducting yourself honestly at all times.

We know that the vast majority of students are honest. If you are one of them, we want to
say that we appreciate this and thank you for your commitment to learning! Honouring the
achievements of hardworking students like you is one of the major reasons why we implement
the policies below. Honesty always pays off in the long run! If you are experiencing personal
challenges that are having an impact on your academic work, please do NOT commit an
academic offence. Instead, talk to us or your academic advisor. We are very understanding
and happy to help if you are facing any issues. There is never a valid reason for committing
an academic offence. Please talk to us!

Academic Integrity: The Fine Print

Familiarize yourself with the University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic
Matters, available at https://www.academicintegrity.utoronto.ca/.

You are expected to know the rules. Not being aware of a rule is not an acceptable
excuse for not having followed it (just as in real life).

If you have any questions about what is or is not permitted in this course, please do
not hesitate to contact us.

As specified under Assessments for some of the course components the lowest, or the two
lowest mark are dropped. This does not apply for an assessment in which an academic
offense was committed and a sanction of “zero on the assessment” was imposed. Potential
offenses include, but are not limited to:
○ Posting assessment questions on any kind of website/online forum to solicit help,
○ Using someone else’s ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement,
○ Looking at someone else’s answers during an exam or test,
○ Misrepresenting your identity,
○ Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment, and

8/9

○ Falsifying or altering any documentation required by the University, including (but not

limited to) forms related to a petition.

It is an Academic Offence both to receive or to provide unauthorized assistance. It does not
matter if you “helped” or “were helped”. The University of Toronto treats cases of academic
misconduct very seriously. All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated
following the procedures outlined in the Code. The consequences for academic misconduct
can be severe, including a failure in the course and a notation on your transcript. Every year,
students get expelled from the University of Toronto for academic offences. Remember that
you enrolled in University to learn something.

Land Acknowledgment

We wish to acknowledge this land on which the University of Toronto operates. For thousands
of years it has been the traditional land of the Huron-Wendat, the Seneca, and most recently,
the Mississaugas of the Credit. Today, this meeting place is still the home to many Indigenous
people from across Turtle Island and we are grateful to have the opportunity to work on this
land.

9/9

