MAT186H1F Calculus I
University of Toronto
Fall 2025

I. Course Overview

Brief Course Description & Learning Objectives:

Welcome to MAT186 Calculus I at the University of Toronto! During this course we will practice transferable
mathematical thinking skills such as modelling, communication, problem-solving, and the role of approxi-
mation.

Beginning with a brief pre-calculus module, we will then begin our calculus study in earnest with the under-
lying theory of limits and continuity. After that we’ll investigate derivatives and how they apply to modelling
an array of phenomena in the form of differential equations. Then we’ll take a run through some notable
other applications of differential calculus including how to exploit the linear approximation to numerically
solve differential equations, and the all-important technique of applied optimization. We will then turn to
integral calculus, where we will learn how thinking about Riemann sums allows us to represent some real-
world quantities with definite integral formulas. Finally, we’ll close the semester by connecting the notions
of derivative and integral via the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.

We hope that by the end of the course you have become fluent in the various concepts related to Calculus
as outlined in the list of modules on page 8 as well as

• Developed your ability to take intellectual and creative risks to solve problems you haven’t seen before.

• Learned to communicate succinctly and precisely using the language and notation of calculus.

• Developed your ability to model engineering and physics problems using calculus and interpret the

results in a real-world context.

• Developed the ability to critically analyze your solutions and check whether or not they make sense.

• Developed your ability to present, and evaluate a logical argument.

Supporting Textbook and Supplementary Reading Material :

The supporting course textbook is on reserve at the Engineering and Computer Science Library and is avail-
able for purchase as an e-text (with a two year license) or a physical textbook. This textbook is not strictly
required, but is recommended as an additional resource throughout the course.

Calculus Early Transcendentals (Third Edition)

• Physical Textbook ($79): Click here to purchase

• e-text ($67.99, two-year license): Purchase from Bookstore here

1 of 9

MyLab Registration for e-text:

1. Once purchased from the Bookstore, you will recieve a MyLab digital “Access Code”.

2. Go here to access your MyLab course. You will first sign in with your existing Pearson student account

or create a new account using your student email.

3. Input your Access Code from the Bookstore. This will be a small button on the left side of the screen.

You can ignore the other offers on this page.

4. Select “Go to my course” to access your e-text.

Technology Requirements & Platforms Used:

In order to participate in this course, students will be required to have:

• Reliable internet access. It is recommended that students have a high speed broadband connection

(LAN, Cable, or DSL) with a minimum download speed of 5 Mbps.

• A computer satisfying the minimal technical requirements. Please familiarize yourself with them.

Quercus:

Quercus is the MAT186 homepage: https://q.utoronto.ca.

Please check the homepage frequently for course announcements, logistics and course materials. All an-
nouncements posted are considered to have been announced to the class and not having read or seen an
announcement is not an accepted reason for not following guidelines or missing deadlines. We recommend
you configure your preferences on Quercus to receive an email notification as soon as an announcement has
been posted.

Gradescope:

All assessments will be administered through Gradescope. Be sure to login to the Canadian server only
at: www.gradescope.ca. Do not use the .com server. Your @mail.utoronto.ca account will be automatically
signed up for a free account before the first term test.. Grades for tests can only be viewed on Gradescope
and will not be synced with Quercus.

2 of 9

II. Learning Cycle & Course Components

Complete Pre-Class Essentials (PCEs):
1.5 hours per week
Three times a week, before class, you will complete a short reading followed by a two-question quiz on
Quercus. The purpose of the readings is for you to familiarize yourself with the elementary concepts of the
modules. The quiz allows you to make sure you’re ready for class; that’s why we call it a Pre-Class Essential.
The quiz should be straightforward if you have done the reading.

Participate in Lectures:
3 hours per week
You will have 3 lectures per week. The lectures will be active; there will be a mix of instructors introducing
concepts and time to work on problems. This will give you an opportunity to practice with new material,
test your basic understanding, and ask questions in real time so you can leave lecture having made genuine
progress with course content.

Participate in Discussion Groups (Tutorials):
1 hour per week
Beginning the week of Mon. Sept. 15, you will have a discussion group (tutorial) facilitated by a Teaching
Assistant (TA). The discussion will focus on some assigned problems which will be made available to you in
advance of your group meeting. You should bring some of your draft work and be prepared to share your
thoughts in small groups with your peers. TAs will circulate throughout the rooms, providing hints, and
giving feedback on your preliminary ideas leading to a consensus on solutions.

3-5.5 hours per week
Self-study, Prepare for a Term Test:
You should be prepared to study outside of class time. The time spent may vary from week-to-week but
you should always be dedicating at least three hours per week. Practice problems created by the teaching
team will be posted each week, in addition to the suggested textbook problems for each module. Consis-
tent practice is how you will deepen your understanding of course content and develop your problem solving
skills. The intention and attention you give to your practice will be fundamental to your success in this course.

You should therefore spend a total of about 8.5 to 11 hours per week on this course. This matches the
expectation that full-time university students with 5 courses will spend about 40 to 55 hours per week on
their studies.

Term Tests:
There will be two term tests that are common to all sections of the course. Each term test will emphasize
material not already tested but may build on previous material. The tentative dates and times for the term
tests are:

Term Test 1: Tues. Sept. 30, 10:00am-12:00pm

Term Test 2: Thurs. Nov 6, 7:00pm-9:00pm.

Universal Make-up: Tues. Nov. 25, 10:00am-12:00pm.

The universal make-up test is mandatory for any student who did not write Test 1 or Test 2 with a validated
petition. It is optional for any student who wrote both Test 1 and Test 2 but wishes to improve their grade.
See the next section (Grading Scheme & Course Policies) for more details. More detailed information about
each test will be posted on Quercus one to two weeks before the date of the test.

Final Exam:
The final exam will be held during the final exam period Dec. 2025 and will be scheduled by the registrar.
Information about the final will be posted on Quercus one to two weeks before the date of the final exam.

3 of 9

III. Grading Scheme & Course Policies

Grading Scheme:
Your final grade will be calculated by the following formula:

• Reflections - 2% of your final grade.

• Pre-Class Essentials (drop lowest 3) - 10% of your final grade.

• Term Test I & II - 38% of your final grade (combined). Each term test is worth an equal value
toward your overall test grade.
If you write both Test 1 and Test 2, you will have the option to
write the universal make-up test to improve your lowest test grade as follows: 0.5(lowest grade test
grade)+0.5(universal make-up test grade). Of course, if you are content with your Test 1 and Test 2
grades, you do not need to write the universal make-up test.

• Final Exam - 50% of your final grade.

Missed Assessments Policies:

• Any term-work you miss should be petitioned. The petition policy of the Faculty of Applied Science
& Engineering can be found here. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with it now, before an
issue arises.

• We are dropping your lowest three Pre-Class Essential marks. Therefore, you do not need to submit
petitions unless you had a legitimate reason to miss more than three PCEs. In that case, you need
to submit a petition for all PCEs that you missed. If you miss more than three PCEs and have a
valid petition for all occasions (including the “first three missed” PCEs), then your final grade will be
re-weighted accordingly. Filing up to three petitions for PCEs will have no effect since the lowest three
scores, including zeros, are dropped anyways, with or without petition. The policy described above is
meant to save you from the hassle of filing petitions. They are not an additional way to excuse missed
work. Of course, if you have more than three valid PCE petitions, all of them will be honoured.

• If you miss a term test you must submit a term-work petition within 7 days of the test date. If you
miss a term test and you do not submit a petition or your petition is deemed invalid, you will receive
a 0 on the term test. If you miss a term test and your petition is deemed valid, then you will write the
universal make-up test to replace the original missed test.

• If you miss the final exam you must submit final exam petition within 7 days of the final exam
date. The Faculty has specific policies regarding final exams. Please contact the First Year Office if
you have any questions.

4 of 9

IV. Teaching Team & Administrative Information

Lecture Section

Instructor

Email

L0101

L0102

L0103

L0104

L0105

L0106

L0107

L0108

L0109

Geoffrey McGregor

geoffrey.mcgregor@utoronto.ca

Omar Alshawa

omar.alshawa@mail.utoronto.ca

Morgan Hooper

morgan.hooper@utoronto.ca

Sean Uppal

uppal@math.toronto.edu

Amaranta Martinez De La Rosa

amaranta.martinezdelarosa@mail.utoronto.ca

Almut Burchard

almut@math.utoronto.ca

Shai Cohen

sh.cohen@utoronto.ca

Schinella D’Souza

schinella.dsouza@utoronto.ca

Jason Hattrick-Simpers

jason.hattrick.simpers@utoronto.ca

Course Coordinator: Geoffrey McGregor

Office Hours:
Each instructor will hold regular weekly office hours. The office hours schedule will be posted on the Quer-
cus homepage, and will begin the week of September 8. These are an opportunity to dialogue with course
instructors outside of the classroom in either a small group or an individual setting. You may attend any
office hour without an appointment. We are always happy to meet and speak with you.

If you have a math related question, be sure to have spent some time on it first, and be ready to explain
what have you attempted. This will help instructors understand where you’re “at” with a problem and allow
us to provide more effective help. Even if you don’t have a particular question but just a feeling that there’s
something you’re not getting about a concept, we can help you work through this. You may also drop in to
chat informally or listen to the questions of others.

Email Policy & Etiquette:
Email is reserved for administrative questions. Please check the syllabus and Quercus first before sending
an email. If the answer to your question(s) is available in the syllabus or on the announcements page on
Quercus, we may not respond to your email. Otherwise, we will respond to emails as soon as possible,
usually within 24 hours (except on weekends). If you have a math question, please visit one of the instructor
office hours posted on the Quercus page.

• Put MAT186 in the subject line, use your UofT email, and always identify yourself.

• Be specific. We’re better able to help you the more specific you are. If your question is complex or
lengthy and requires multiple back-and-forth emails, we will ask you to attend office hours instead.

• Be professional. Please use an appropriate tone, level of formality, and review what you’ve written
before sending your email. Email, in the context of the class and communication with instructors, is
professional correspondence and we ask you to treat it as such.

5 of 9

V. Supports

The Rewind Sessions are an opportunity to reengage with material covered in the previous week’s lectures.
Perhaps you need extra support for a particular sub-module (or two), or maybe you missed a class because
you were sick. This is where The Rewind Sessions come into play. Run by an instructor or experienced
TA, these sessions will review material from the previous week. We’ll update the Quercus page with which
topic(s) will be re-winded each week!

Drop-in Homework Club is held Monday through Thursday evenings from 5:00-7:00pm. The location
will be announced once confirmed. This is a study space primarily for first year engineering students and
is staffed with Teaching Assistants from the Math Learning Centre. We encourage you to use this space
regularly when working on your Calculus practice problems, or reviewing for an upcoming exam.

Just-In-Time Review Sessions are held during the second week of class on prerequisite math skills for
calculus, including sessions on functions, equations and inequalities, and trigonometry. For more information
about these sessions please check out the MLC Quercus page: https://q.utoronto.ca/courses/128914/
pages/review-of-prerequisite-math-skills

G.E.A.R.S is a peer-led support initiative designed to help new engineering students with coursework and
transition effectively into university life. Check the following link for more information http://uoft.me/
gears

EngSuccess is a peer-mentorship initiative where upper-year undergraduate engineering students (men-
tors) support first-year engineering students through academic and social guidance. The goal is to help
incoming students navigate challenges, get familiar with the Skule community, and improve both academic
success and professional development. Check the follopwing link for more information https://undergrad.
engineering.utoronto.ca/advising-and-wellness/eng-success/

6 of 9

VI. Institutional Policies

Academic Integrity:
Participating honestly, respectfully, responsibly, and fairly in this academic community ensures that the U
of T degree that you earn will be valued as a true indication of your individual academic achievement, and
will continue to receive the respect and recognition it deserves.

Please familiarize yourself with the University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters:
https://governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/secretariat/policies/code-behaviour-academic-matters-july-1-2019.
A simplified version is available here:
https://www.academicintegrity.utoronto.ca/perils-and-pitfalls/

The use of generative artificial intelligence (AI) tools is strictly prohibited in all course assessments
unless explicitly stated otherwise by the course coordinator. This includes, but is not limited to, ChatGPT,
GitHub Copilot, and open-source models that you have trained and/or deployed yourself. You may not in-
teract with, nor copy, paraphrase, or adapt any content from any generative AI for the purpose of completing
assignments in this course. Use of generative AI will be considered use of an unauthorized aid, which is a
form of academic misconduct under the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.

This course policy is designed to promote your learning and intellectual development and to ensure that
our evaluations are a fair and accurate assessment of your learning. Though it may be tempting to use
generative AI to assist you when completing your assignments, this will simply inhibit your learning. If the
work you submit is essentially the output of generative AI, then what have you learned and what value are
you adding? Think of it this way: if a potential employer or supervisor can get as much from an AI tool as
what you’re able to do yourself, then why should they hire you at all? You should aim to understand course
content at a level that far exceeds what an automated tool can achieve. Our course—and in particular, each
assignment—is designed to help you attain true mastery of the course content. If you have questions or are
stuck, please come to office hours, where we’ll be happy to help!

Copyright:
Course materials belong to your instructor, the University, and/or other sources depending on the specific
facts of each situation and are protected by copyright. Do not download, copy, or share any course or student
materials or videos without the explicit permission of the instructor.

Accessibility:
The University provides academic accommodations for students with disabilities in accordance with the
terms of the Ontario Human Rights Code. This occurs through a collaborative process that acknowledges
a collective obligation to develop an accessible learning environment that both meets the needs of students
and preserves the essential academic requirements of the University’s courses and programs. Students with
diverse learning styles and needs are welcome in this course. If you have a disability that may require ac-
commodations, please feel free to approach your Course Instructor and/or the Accessibility Services office
as soon as possible. The sooner you let us know your needs the quicker we can assist you in achieving your
learning goals in this course.

https://undergrad.engineering.utoronto.ca/advising-and-wellness/accessibility-services/

Equity, Diversity and Inclusion:
The University of Toronto is committed to equity, human rights and respect for diversity. All members
of the learning environment in this course should strive to create an atmosphere of mutual respect where
all members of our community can express themselves, engage with each other, and respect one another’s
differences. U of T does not condone discrimination or harassment against any persons or communities.

7 of 9

VII. Modules

A Pre-Calculus
A1 Trigonometry
A2 Inverse Functions
A3 Logarithms & Exponentials
A4 Estimations, Absolute Values & Inequalities

B Limits & Continuity
B1 Limits
B2 Limits continued
B3 Squeeze Theorem
B4 Continuity & IVT

C Derivatives
C1 Derivative at a Point
C2 The Derivative Function
C3 Derivatives Rules
C4 Linear Approximation
C5 Interpretation of the Derivative
C6 Implicit & Inverse Differentiation
C7 Related Rates

D Applications of Derivatives
D1 Differential Equations & their Solutions
D2 Phase Lines & Slope Fields
D3 Euler’s Method
D4 L’Hˆopital’s Rule
D5 Critical Points
D6 Applied Optimization

E Definite Integrals & Riemann Sums
E1 Approximating Definite Integrals
E2 Sigma Notation & Subintervals
E3 Limits of Riemann Sums
E4 Modelling with Riemann Sums (Four Parts)

F Antiderivatives
F1 Antiderivatives
F2 Initial Value Problems
F3 Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part I
F4 Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part II

8 of 9

Textbook Reference
Section: 1.4
Sections: 1.3, 1.4
Section: 1.3

Textbook Reference
Sections: 2.1-2.5
Sections: 2.1-2.5
Section: 2.3
Section: 2.6

Textbook Reference
Section: 3.1
Section: 3.2
Sections: 3.3 & 3.7
Section: 4.6
Section: 3.6
Sections: 3.8 & 3.10
Section: 3.11

Textbook Reference
Section: 9.1 (pg. 597, 598)
Section: 9.2
Section: 9.2
Section: 4.8
Section: 4.1
Section 4.5

Textbook Reference
Section: 5.1
Section: 5.1
Section: 5.2
Section: 6.1-6.6

Textbook Reference
Section: 4.9
Section: 4.9
Section: 5.3
Section: 5.3

VIII. Tentative Schedule:

Some sections may be slightly ahead or behind this schedule. Please note that there are no lectures nor
discussion groups during the Fall Reading Break Oct. 27 - Oct. 31.

Dates
Sept. 2 - Sept. 5
Sept. 8- Sept. 12
Sept. 15 - Sept. 19
Sept. 22 - Sept. 26
Sept. 29 - Oct 3
Oct. 6 - Oct 10
Oct. 14 - Oct 17
Oct. 20 - Oct. 24
Nov. 3 - Nov. 7
Nov. 10 - Nov. 14
Nov. 17 - Nov. 21
Nov. 24 - Nov. 28
Dec. 1 - Dec. 2

Modules
Introduction, A1, A2
A3, A4, B1
B2, B3, B4
C1.C2, C3
C4, C5, C6
C7, D1, D2
D3, D4
D5, D6, E1
E2, E3, E4-1
E4-2, E4-3, E4-4
F1, F2, F3
F4, Catch-up, Review
Review for Monday Lectures

9 of 9

