Mat 187

Textbook: OpenStax Calculus Volumes 2 & 3

Webpage: https://q.utoronto.ca

Calculus II

Spring 2025

Tutorials: Starting Monday, Jan. 20

The Calculus revolutionized modern science when Newton and Leibniz invented it. Not only did the
Calculus provide ways to model and compute previously difficult-to-understand phenomena, it also
presented a new way to conceptualize the world.

In your previous Calculus course, you studied derivatives, or rates of change. In this course, we will
study the derivative’s companion, the integral, as well as ways to apply derivatives and integrals to
approximate functions (e.g., Taylor series approximations) and to model via differential equations.

The Calculus has been extremely successful, and most of the mechanical procedures needed for doing
Calculus have been automated by computers (e.g., Wolfram Alpha). Because computers remove much
of the need to memorize complicated procedures, this course will focus on the ways that framing
questions in terms of calculus can help us solve problems. We will also focus on how to communicate
mathematics to others, which is especially important in the Engineering domain.

Learning
Outcomes

After taking this course, you will be able to:

To Succeed

Apply the methods of calculus, especially integral caculus and differential equations, to solve
novel problems.
Use approximations to simplify complex problems.
Model and solve real-world problems using differential equations.
Solve basic integrals using standard techniques like integration by parts, trigonometric substi-
tution, and partial fractions.

Learning is hard! It is exercise for the mind, and like exercise, when you’re doing it, it feels pretty
uncomfortable. Here are some tips to help you succeed academically (getting the grade you want)
and intellectually (learning the most you can).

Form a regularly-meeting study group of 3–4 people. Math should not be done in isolation! You
need others to bounce ideas off of and to motivate you when you’re feeling down.

Do your Pre-Class Essentials reading. A good rule of thumb is every hour spent studying before
class is worth two hours of studying after class.

Force yourself to explain. When reviewing, it’s easy to glance at a solution and think, “Oh yeah,
I knew that.” Don’t do it! Force yourself to explain each problem/concept without referencing a
solution. Be patient with yourself—it might take 5 or 10 minutes before it finally comes to mind,
but studying this way will be significantly more effective.

Prereq’s

To be prepared for this course, you need to have a solid understanding of Calculus I (MAT186). If
you’re feeling shaky on your foundation, start reviewing earlier rather than later.

1

Homework

Assessment
Reflections

2%

Pre-Class

Essentials (PCEs)

10%

Midterm

38%

Like in MAT186, this course will feature homework assignments that will not be turned in. However,
these  assignments  are  not  optional—they  are  an  essential  tool  for  properly  learning  the  course
material.

The only way to learn mathematics is by doing mathematics. In this course you are asked to be an
active agent in your own learning. You are expected to be present in all sessions of your lectures and
tutorials. During lectures, you will be working on problems and sharing your ideas. Some lectures
will end with a reflection activity; these activities will compose your Reflections mark.

Pre-Class Essentials (PCEs) are assigned readings or videos, followed by a short quiz. You are expected
to do the PCE reading and check in before each lecture. There will be about 30 Pre-Class Essentials
(PCEs). The due dates will be posted on Quercus. Your lowest six scores will be dropped.

There are two equally weighted midterms scheduled as well as a Universal Makeup. The dates are
Tuesday, Feb. 04 and Thursday, Mar. 06 and Thursday, Mar. 27.

The Universal Makeup will serve as a makeup test for any midterms you may have missed with an
approved petition. However, you may optionally write the Universal Makeup even if you didn’t miss
a test. If you do so, the score of your lowest midterm will be replaced by a 50/50 mix of your lowest
midterm score and your score on the Universal Makeup.

Final Exam

50%

A comprehensive final exam will take place during the final exam period. The date and time will be
determined by FASE.

Your course mark will be computed as a weighted average of your mark in each category. (See the
left column for the weights.)

Missed
Assessments

The petition policy of the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering can be found at http://uoft.
me/petitions. Petitions must be filed for all missed work unless stated otherwise.

Any foreseeable circumstances must be reported at least three weeks in advance. For example, “I had
a varsity sports game yesterday” is not acceptable since sports games are scheduled weeks ahead. As
soon as you know about scheduled events you should look at your academic obligations and notify
the coordinator of conflicts.

Pre-Class Essentials (PCEs)
Since the lowest six PCE scores are dropped, if you miss at most six PCEs, you do not need to submit
a petition. If you miss more than six PCEs, you must submit a petition for every missed PCE.

For example, if you missed 5 PCEs, you do not need to submit any petitions. If you missed 8 PCEs,
you must submit 8 peititions.

Tests
If you submit a petition for a missed test and it is accepted, the weight of your missed test will be
redistributed to your final exam.

2

Email &
Etiquette

We will try to respond to emails as soon as possible, but during busy times (like before an exam) it
might take several days to respond. If your situation is urgent, talk to a professor after class or in
office hours.

When writing an email:

Put MAT187 in the subject line, use your utoronto.ca email, and identify yourself by
name and UTORid.
Be specific. We’re better able to help you if you’re specific about your issue and you include all
necessary information. If your situation is complex, it is best to come to office hours to discuss it.
Check the syllabus and course webpage first. If your question is answered on the syllabus or
the course webpage, we may not respond to your email.
Be professional. Please use appropriate tone and level of formality in your emails. Do not use
slang or texting abbreviations. It is tradition in North America to start emails Dear Professor …,
and end them, Thank you, ….
No content questions. If you have mathematical questions, please bring your question to office
hours.

Lectures &
Contacts

There are several lecture sections. (R means Thursday)

Section

Time

Room Instructor

Email

LEC0101 MW4–5, F1–2 MY 150

J. Siefken
G. McGregor

admin187@math.toronto.edu

geoffrey.mcgregor@utoronto.ca

Office

PG 101C

LEC0102

TR4–5, F2–3 MY 150

LEC0103 MW5–6, F5–6 MY 150

S. Cohen
I. Beach

J. Siefken
A. Pannu

sh.cohen@utoronto.ca

GB 148 1/3

isabel.beach@mail.utoronto.ca

admin187@math.toronto.edu

PG 101C

arman.pannu@mail.utoronto.ca

The  course  coordinator  is  Professor  J.  Siefken.  Please  email  any  administrative  concerns  to
admin187@math.toronto.edu.

Office hours for each instructor will be posted on the course webpage.

Tutorials

You must register in a tutorial section through ROSI/ACORN by the end of the first week of classes.
Tutorials will begin Monday, Jan. 20.

Attendance  in  tutorials  is  mandatory.  During  tutorials,  you  will  be  working  on  solving  complex
and novel problems and additionally practicing your mathematical writing. Tutorials are not about
answers to problems. They are about practice. Thus, you shouldn’t expect to go over every tutorial
problem during a tutorial.

3

Academic
Resources
Accessibility

Needs

The  University  of  Toronto  is  committed  to  accessibility.  If  you  require  accommodations  for  a
disability, or have any accessibility concerns about the course, the classroom or course materials,
please contact Accessibility Services http://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca as soon as possible.

English Language

Instruction

For information on campus writing centres and writing courses, please visit http://www.writing.
utoronto.ca

Other Resources Student Life Programs and Services http://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca

Academic Success Centre http://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca/asc
Health and Wellness Centre http://www.studentlife.utoronto.ca/hwc

Academic
Integrity

Academic integrity is fundamental to learning and scholarship at the University of Toronto. Partic-
ipating honestly, respectfully, responsibly, and fairly in this academic community ensures that the
University of Toronto degree that you earn will be valued as a true indication of your individual
academic achievement, and will continue to receive the respect and recognition it deserves.

Familiarize  yourself  with  the  University  of  Toronto’s  Code  of  Behaviour  on  Academic
Matters. It is the rule book for academic behaviour at the University of Toronto, and you are expected
to know the rules.

The University of Toronto treats cases of academic misconduct very seriously. All suspected cases
of  academic  dishonesty  will  be  investigated  following  the  procedures  outlined  in  the  Code.  The
consequences for academic misconduct can be severe, including a failure in the course and a notation
on your transcript. If you have any questions about what is or is not permitted in this course, please
do not hesitate to contact your instructor or the course coordinator. If you have questions about
appropriate research and citation methods, seek out additional information from your instructor or
from other available campus resources like the University of Toronto Writing Website. If you are
experiencing personal challenges that are having an impact on your academic work, please speak to
your instructor or seek the advice of the First Year Office.

4

Schedule

Below is a preliminary schedule for the course. Textbook sections that are prefixed with “V3” refer
to OpenStax Calculus Volume 3. Otherwise, sections reference OpenStax Calculus Volume 2.

Week 1
January 6–12

(A1) Polar Coordinates, (A2) Complex Numbers
Textbook: §7.3

Week 2
January 13–19

Week 3
January 20–26

Week 4
January 27–
February 2

Week 5
February 3–9

(B1) Polynomail Interpolation, (B2) Approximating with Taylor Polynomials

(B3) Numerical Integration, (B4) Sequences and Series
Textbook: §3.6, §5.1–5.2
Tutorials begin.

(B5-1) Taylor Series, (B5-2) Manipulating Power Series
Textbook: §6.3–6.4

(B6) Power Series Convergence
Textbook: §5.4
Midterm I: Tuesday, February 4 at 10:10am to 12:00pm

Week 6
February 10–16

(C1) Integration by Parts, (C2) Trigonometric Substitution
Textbook: §3.1, §3.3

Week 7

February 17–23 Family Day Monday, February 17 (no classes)

Reading break February 17–22 (no classes)

Week 8
February 24–
March 2

Week 9
March 3–9

(C3) Partial Fractions, (C4) Improper Integrals
Textbook: §3.4, §3.7

(D1) Parametric Equations, (D2) Calculus in Polar Coordinates
Textbook: §7.1–7.2, §7.4
Midterm II: Thursday, March 6 at 7:10pm to 9:00pm

Week 10
March 10–16

(E1) Introduction to ODEs, (E2) Modelling with ODEs
Textbook: §4.1

Week 11
March 17–23

(E3) Separable ODEs, (E4) Linear First-Order ODEs
Textbook: §4.3, §4.5

Week 12
March 24–30

(E5) Homogeneous Equations
Textbook: V3 §7.1
Universal Makeup Midterm: Thursday, March 27 at 7:10pm to 9:00pm

Week 13
March 31–
April 6

(E6) Non-Homogeneous Equations (E7) Applications of ODEs
Textbook: V3 §7.2, §7.3

5

