University of Toronto - Engineering 

MIE100S - Applied Mechanics: Dynamics 
Final Examination - April 2018 
Exam length: 150 minutes 

First Year: Mechanical, Industrial, Electrical, Computer, Track One 

Instructors: 

A.N. Sinclair 
L.A. Sinclair 
L. You 
E. Young 

General Instructions: 

Answer all questions in the CrowdMark booklet provided, on the correct pages. 
All rough work must be NEAT and CLEAR to earn credit for each question. 
You must use a pen or dark pencil. 
Answer all seven questions. Total marks on this exam = 100. 
For your final answers, express vector quantities using the coordinate system specified in the 
question. 

This is a Type D examination. Permitted Aids: 

Non-communicating/non-programmable calculator, such as Casio FX-991 or Sharp EL-520 

One 8 'A" x 11" aid sheet, any colour and format, brought to the test by the student. You may 
write on both sides of the sheet. 

Page 1 of seven pages 

Block B and Block C are on a hill sloped at 20 degrees as shown in the diagram. The blocks are 
linked by a rope in tension that passes around a pulley. The pulley has zero mass, and the center 
of the pulley is attached to a wall. There is friction between the two blocks, and between the 
ground and block B; the coefficients of friction between all flat surfaces are p,  = 0.3 and 
pk = 0.2. The mass of block C is 10 kg, and the mass of block B is 8 kg. 

A force P = 50 î Newtons is applied to block C as shown. Block C has a velocity of 8 1 m/s at the 
instant shown in the diagram. 

12  Draw separate free-body diagrams of block B and block C, showing clearly the direction in which 

each of the forces acts. What is the acceleration of block C at the instant shown in the diagram? 

(Make sure your work is clearly laid out, neat, and easy to understand) 

Page 2 of seven pages 

V 

2. 

A particle P is travelling in a spiral path as shown. At the instant shown in the diagram, the 
particle's speed is increasing at a constant rate of 2 mIs2, and its distance from the origin "0" is 
increasing at a constant rate of 4 m/s. At the instant shown in the diagram, the particle's position 
is {x,y} = {14,0} meters, and its speed is 7 m/s. 

Determine 

dO 
dt 

 for the particle P at the instant shown in the diagram, where 9 is the angular 

8 

position of P measured with respect to the x-axis in polar coordinates. 

Also determine the x-component of the particle's acceleration a at the instant shown in the 
diagram. 

1,O} meters 

Page 3 of seven pages 

V 

5 

10 

3. 

At the instant shown in the attached diagram, the bar AB is rotating in the positive direction 
with an angular velocity of  WAB  = 42.5 radians/s. 

(a) At the instant shown in the diagram, what is the velocity of point B? Use the co-ordinate 

system provided to express your answer. 

(b) Using your answer from part (a), find both the velocity of point D and the angular velocity of 
bar BD at the instant shown in the diagram. Use the co-ordinate system provided to express 
your answers. 

5 

(c) Using your answers from part (a) and (b), find the acceleration of point B at the instant shown 

in the diagram if the speed of B is also increasing by 8m/s2. Use the co-ordinate system 
provided to express your answer. (5  marks) 

120 mm 

120 mm 

10 1 

A

/ 

120 mm 

B 

G 

PI] 

'~ 

150 mm 

45 

A4 

Y 

L, 

Page 4 of seven pages 

 
4. A slender rod of mass m = 1.3 kg and length L = 2.0 in is falling straight down from Position 1, as 
shown in the diagram (dotted lines). A rope with negligible mass is attached to the fixed point at A 
on the ceiling, and tied to the end of the rod at B. The rope is initially not in tension. The rope is 
suddenly in tension when the rod reaches Position 2, and the rope is hanging straight down. The 
rope stays in tension afterwards, but is allowed to swing. 

(a) Draw the free body diagram of the rod immediately after the rope is in tension. 

FT-1 

If V'G  = -31 m/s just before the rope is in tension, what is the rod's angular velocity, w, 
immediately after the rope is in tension? 

6 

(c) 

= -2.51 m/s immediately after the rope is in tension, what is the rod's total kinetic energy 

at that moment? 

(d) If the rod is initially at rest in Position (1), and h = 1.5 m and the rope has a length of 2m, what 

F-1 

is velocity of point C, v, just before it reaches Position (2)? 

Rope initially not 

-intension 

Y 

1 VA 

-

--------- 

- 

l.5 m1 

-- 

) 

x 

\\o=200 

h 

- 

rope in tension 

-, 

Position (I) 

g = 9.81 mIs2 

G 

Position (2) 

Page 5 of seven pages 

 
The wheel C has a mass = 200 kg, and the bar AB has a mass = 100 kg. One end of the bar AB is 
connected by a pin to the center of the wheel. The other end of the bar is leaning against a vertical 
wall and can slide on the wall without friction. Bar AB is 10 meters long, and the radius of wheel 
C is 1 m. The spring stiffness k = 200 N/rn. One end of the spring is attached to the ceiling, and 
the other end is attached to a rope that is wound around a pulley and then wound around wheel C 
as shown in the diagram. The relaxed length of the spring is 2m. Coefficients of friction between 
the wheel and ground are y, = 0.4, and ,Uk  = 0.3. The system is initially at rest as shown in the 
diagram, with the spring length equal to 3m. 

a) Draw a free body diagram of bar AB and a separate diagram for wheel C at the instant shown 

17-1 

in the diagram. 

Fq b)  The system is then released from rest at the position shown in the diagram. Find 9 if both the 

bar AB and the wheel C remain stationary after the system is released. 

12 

c) If 0= 30°, find (xAB  and ctc after the system is released from rest. 

Y 

i1 

wheel C 

Page 6 of seven pages 

6.  The mass moves only in the vertical direction. Ignore any rotation of the mass. Assume that the 

rope wound around the pulley remains in tension at all times. At time t=0, the mass is lifted a 
small distance from its equilibrium position, and then released. 

m=l5kg 

k1 100N/m 

k2 =35NIm 

C=40--- 
rn/s 

6] (a) Find the period Td for damped, unforced vibrations of this system. 

-2 

F

(b) How long will it take for the vibration amplitude to diminish to 3% of its initial value? 

y 

VT 

g= 9.81 mis2  

7.  A uniform thin rod AB of mass 10 kg and length 4.4 meters is pinned at point C. The rod is in 
equilibrium in the horizontal position as shown. Spring k1  = 120 N/rn, and k2  = 180 N/rn. 

(a) Determine the natural frequency of vibration Cv, for very low-amplitude oscillations. 
6 
____  (b) A moment M = 4 sin (w,, t) Newton-meters is then applied to make the rod oscillate with a 
F6 

very small amplitude about point C. Determine the steady-state vertical amplitude of 
oscillation of point B, if  co  = 5 s'. 

>< 

A 

0.75m 

k1 
A ft 

Y 

+ 

3m 

< 

1.4m  - 

cA 

g9.81 mls2  

B 

1.2m 

k2  

100 marks total 

Page 7 of seven pages 

